[Amit Varma]: Do you think of yourself as an intelligent person?
[Amit Varma]: If you do, let me share a thought with you.
[Amit Varma]: If you're smart, the optimal way for you to behave is as if you're stupid.
[Amit Varma]: Let me explain what I mean.
[Amit Varma]: Let's say you're a genius and you think you're a genius.
[Amit Varma]: This gives you confidence, which is great, but it might also give you intellectual arrogance,
[Amit Varma]: which is not great.
[Amit Varma]: You might think that, hey, you're so smart, you can figure anything out.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you think that you have figured many things out.
[Amit Varma]: And this is dangerous, because you see, the world is complex, even if the smart people
[Amit Varma]: among us tell artful stories that make it seem simple.
[Amit Varma]: And if you're a genius, and you believe that you're a genius, you may not have the intellectual
[Amit Varma]: humility to work hard, to be open to new insights, to learn, learn, learn all the time.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're a smart person, the smart way to behave is as if you know nothing, everything
[Amit Varma]: is a mystery at some level, the world is full of wonderment and opportunity.
[Amit Varma]: And you want to work hard and soak up all the knowledge you can.
[Amit Varma]: This is why the smartest people should think of themselves as stupid.
[Amit Varma]: It would indeed be stupid to think of yourself as smart.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I know we can play word games and this can get circular.
[Amit Varma]: But you know what I mean?
[Amit Varma]: Intellectual humility and the desire to fill the gaps in our knowledge are the secrets
[Amit Varma]: to success.
[Amit Varma]: Nurture these attributes.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Max Rodenbeck, a remarkable journalist who until recently was a South
[Amit Varma]: Asia Bureau Chief for the Economist based in New Delhi.
[Amit Varma]: He told me during this conversation that when he first came to India to take up this assignment,
[Amit Varma]: he decided to think of himself as stupid so he could learn as much as possible about this
[Amit Varma]: country.
[Amit Varma]: This is a fantastic attitude for any newcomer to any country to have.
[Amit Varma]: I've seen foreign correspondents in the past who come to a country, talk to taxi drivers
[Amit Varma]: and elite friends, apply their pre-existing frames into a madly complex nation and think
[Amit Varma]: they have it all figured out.
[Amit Varma]: They don't.
[Amit Varma]: And this is a trap Max avoided when he came here.
[Amit Varma]: Max has mixed American and British parentage, but he grew up in Cairo and is perhaps more
[Amit Varma]: from there than from anywhere else.
[Amit Varma]: He's written a fantastic book on the city he grew up in called Cairo, the City Victorious.
[Amit Varma]: And as a journalist, he spent many years as a Middle East Bureau Chief of the Economist,
[Amit Varma]: predicting the coming of the Arab Spring in Egypt.
[Amit Varma]: He's considered a global expert in the Middle East, in fact.
[Amit Varma]: He's also contributed to the New York Review of Books and Foreign Policy, and I'll link
[Amit Varma]: some of his essays in the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: I'd first met Max in Delhi a couple of years ago, and since then, he's dropped me more
[Amit Varma]: than a few kind words about this podcast, to which I'd given him an open invitation.
[Amit Varma]: So when he turned 60 and decided to leave India, he offered to come on the scene in
[Amit Varma]: the unseen and share his learnings.
[Amit Varma]: Thus, we have this episode.
[Amit Varma]: I was impressed by the fact that Max had avoided the typical traps foreign correspondents often
[Amit Varma]: fall into and continued to look with wide-eyed wonder and curiosity at the world around him.
[Amit Varma]: The fact that his gaze was different from mine meant that he could reveal facets of
[Amit Varma]: my own country to me, which I had long normalized and perhaps you had too.
[Amit Varma]: We spoke a lot about Cairo and what Egypt has in common with India.
[Amit Varma]: The rise of lunatic extremism is one of them, and Max had thoughts on the similarities between
[Amit Varma]: the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt and the RSS over here.
[Amit Varma]: There is so much in common between Egypt and India, not just in our politics, but also
[Amit Varma]: in our society.
[Amit Varma]: We also spoke about the changing shape and relevance of journalism in these modern times.
[Amit Varma]: And after the episode was done, and we were chilling over a bottle of an excellent single
[Amit Varma]: malt named Rampur, Max regaled us with one fantastic story after another.
[Amit Varma]: So I said, hey, let's get some of these on tape.
[Amit Varma]: So just as I did in episode 250 with Narendra Sinhoy, I sat Max down for a storytelling
[Amit Varma]: session.
[Amit Varma]: That comes at the end of the episode, just when it seems that our conversation is over.
[Amit Varma]: And now, before our conversation, let's take a brief commercial break and let me tell you
[Amit Varma]: about an exciting new show hosted by a former guest of the scene in the unseen, Harsha Bhogle.
[Amit Varma]: The Turing test was once proposed as a test for whether a machine had achieved human intelligence.
[Amit Varma]: Well, artificial intelligence is going to go past human intelligence pretty soon.
[Amit Varma]: And my contention is that many humans would fail the Turing test.
[Amit Varma]: Well, for some of the problems that we are not smart enough to figure out with our own
[Amit Varma]: brains, thank goodness we have AI to help us.
[Amit Varma]: And telling us about how this journey is happening is a sponsor of this episode, a podcast called
[Amit Varma]: Paradigm Shift.
[Amit Varma]: Paradigm Shift is a new show by Microsoft India, produced by ATS Studios and hosted
[Amit Varma]: by my friend Harsha Bhogle.
[Amit Varma]: On this show, every Friday, Harsha tells us stories of the intersection of artificial
[Amit Varma]: intelligence and human lives.
[Amit Varma]: How is AI making us better at forecasting the weather?
[Amit Varma]: How are elite sports people coached as much by AI as by humans?
[Amit Varma]: How can Indian agriculture be transformed by AI?
[Amit Varma]: How can we figure out which species need to be saved by us and what can we do to protect
[Amit Varma]: them?
[Amit Varma]: AI is solving real world problems and making life better for us puny human beings.
[Amit Varma]: And I urge you to listen to Paradigm Shift for some pretty funky stories about how this
[Amit Varma]: is happening.
[Amit Varma]: Paradigm Shift is available on Spotify, Apple Podcasts, Amazon Music, basically all podcast
[Amit Varma]: apps.
[Amit Varma]: And Harsha is the man, the best kind of storyteller for the best kind of stories.
[Amit Varma]: To learn more about how Microsoft is empowering developers and organizations and all of us
[Amit Varma]: with the power of AI, do visit microsoft.com slash AI and check out Paradigm Shift right
[Amit Varma]: away.
[Amit Varma]: Stories of innovation shaped by intelligence.
[Amit Varma]: Max, welcome to the scene of the unseen.
[Guest]: I mean, it's a great pleasure to be here.
[Guest]: I've been looking forward to this a lot.
[Amit Varma]: And the comment you made just before we started recording was that I should design the room
[Amit Varma]: as a confessional with those little boxes and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, you were telling me just a while ago that during the lockdown, you actually
[Amit Varma]: wrote a racy, steamy thriller, which no doubt might come as a surprise to people who don't
[Amit Varma]: know you personally and have just been following your writing with great admiration for a long
[Amit Varma]: time.
[Amit Varma]: So how was the lockdown for you?
[Amit Varma]: And how did you get down to writing this racy, steamy thriller?
[Amit Varma]: And what is it about?
[Guest]: Well, it sounds like a horrible thing to say, you know, a couple of years later, the first
[Guest]: part of the lockdown back in 2020, it was I was in Delhi, it was actually a lovely,
[Guest]: the most beautiful spring I remember in the history of Delhi.
[Guest]: It was gorgeous, day after day of blue skies.
[Guest]: And the sort of tragedy of COVID hadn't really set in, that was the next year, then things
[Guest]: got really unpleasant.
[Guest]: But we had this lockdown and not much to do.
[Guest]: And I'd been, you know, wanting to do something that was not journalism, to write something
[Guest]: that's completely fiction, absolutely off the top of my head.
[Guest]: And I'd had stories rattling around in my brain for quite a long time before.
[Guest]: And so this, you know, basically 200 page book came pouring out all in the space of
[Guest]: like, you know, four weeks.
[Guest]: I was just getting up at six in the morning, and it just came flowing out.
[Guest]: So it was great.
[Guest]: It was fun, because it's just, you know, pure sort of fantasy.
[Guest]: It's a bit kinky.
[Guest]: It's a bit violent.
[Guest]: It was all set in the Middle East, nothing to do with India, nothing to do with where
[Guest]: I am right now or my own life, particularly.
[Guest]: But, you know, making up characters and doing things to them was a lot of fun.
[Amit Varma]: Wow, amazing.
[Amit Varma]: And so waking up at six and like, what was the routine?
[Amit Varma]: Like, how long would you write?
[Amit Varma]: How much would you work?
[Guest]: About five hours a day, something like that in the morning, get up, have a cup of coffee
[Guest]: or make a pot of coffee and just keep going.
[Guest]: When it was really flowing, I was writing like 2,000, 3,000 words a day, which is quite
[Guest]: a lot actually of, you know, polished stuff ready to go.
[Guest]: So that's the kind of writing that as a journalist, you know, because I've been practicing as
[Guest]: a journalist for such a long time, when you actually have to write about a particular
[Guest]: subject to a particular audience to a particular timetable, it was just really liberating to
[Guest]: just, you know, do whatever I wanted.
[Guest]: And I found it just came, you know, pouring out a great speed, which was kind of a great
[Amit Varma]: feeling actually.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: And did it sort of make you reconsider the kind of work you do and what you want to do
[Guest]: going forward?
[Guest]: Yes, absolutely.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I think I'd much rather be writing kinky thrillers than working as a journalist.
[Guest]: But you know, we have to make a living and there are other rewards to being a journalist.
[Guest]: So but I will certainly, at some point in the future, write more things like kinky thrillers.
[Amit Varma]: So, yeah, I loved reading your book, Cairo, by the way, and parts of that do read a little
[Amit Varma]: bit like a thriller, which is something that, you know, you find in, you know, history,
[Amit Varma]: that history well told can be, you know, as exciting as anything else that's out there.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you know, there are these lovely bits about Shagaral Durr, am I pronouncing
[Amit Varma]: it right?
[Guest]: Shagaral Durr.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, I'm sorry.
[Amit Varma]: Don't worry if it's...
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I won't say it again, because I don't think I'll manage to get that I'll get something
[Amit Varma]: wrong.
[Amit Varma]: Shagaral Durr is the sort of the daughter of an Abbasid slave who landed up in Egypt
[Amit Varma]: and got married to the big boss there and the big boss dies.
[Amit Varma]: And she hides his death for a while because, you know, till her son can come back.
[Amit Varma]: But her son is a bit of a creep.
[Amit Varma]: So she gets rid of the son.
[Amit Varma]: And then she marries, you know, her head slave, or not exactly a slave.
[Amit Varma]: These mamalukes.
[Amit Varma]: Am I pronouncing that right?
[Unknown]: That's right.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And she pronounces, yeah, and mamalukes.
[Amit Varma]: And yeah, so she rules for a while, but then she figures out that this mamaluke she's married
[Amit Varma]: is planning to marry someone else.
[Amit Varma]: And so she gives him a summons to come to her and he's apparently as you mentioned in
[Amit Varma]: your book, he's a little worried because a fortune teller has foretold that he will die
[Amit Varma]: at the hands of a woman.
[Amit Varma]: And sure enough, he's on his way to see her, he's stabbed by five assassins, after which
[Amit Varma]: you have this great para, which could be from your steamy book, you know, it's that extremely
[Amit Varma]: entertaining, where you write, quote, it was said that Shagarul Durr, sorry, apologies
[Amit Varma]: to anyone who's offended by my pronunciations.
[Amit Varma]: I pronounce Indian words this way also, so it's not very good.
[Amit Varma]: It was said that Shagarul Durr realized she was doomed and so crushed her jewels in a
[Amit Varma]: mortar to stop them ever falling into the hands of another woman.
[Amit Varma]: Soon after that, Ali, her mamaluke husband's son by his first wife, stormed the palace
[Amit Varma]: with a furious band of his father's troops.
[Amit Varma]: They hauled the Sultana from her quarters and flung her at the mercy of his father.
[Amit Varma]: Umm Ali, who had been divorced from her dashing officer in favor of Shagarul Durr, struck
[Amit Varma]: her rival and hurled insults before having her female servant strip the ex-Sultana and
[Amit Varma]: beat her to death with wooden bath clogs.
[Amit Varma]: Then as a 15th century Ibn Iyas recalls, quote, and this is Ibn Iyas's words, not yours.
[Amit Varma]: She was dragged by the feet and thrown from the top of the moat naked with nothing but
[Amit Varma]: a garment around the waist.
[Amit Varma]: She remained there in the moat for three days, unburied, until it is said one of the rebel
[Amit Varma]: descended into the moat under cover of night and cut off the sash of her garment because
[Amit Varma]: it was of red silk with a circle of pearls and because it smelled of musk, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: At length, Shagarul Durr was buried in her own magnificent tomb, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: So a lot of fun, but where I kind of want to start is really with your personal history,
[Amit Varma]: which I also learned about because of your wonderful book on Cairo, where you spoke about
[Amit Varma]: the Imperial Fishing Fleet and the donkey without which you would not have been here
[Amit Varma]: today.
[Guest]: So tell me a little bit about that story.
[Guest]: That's delightful.
[Guest]: Yeah, the Imperial Fishing Fleet is what they used to call the ladies who would set out
[Guest]: from Britain basically towards India to find a husband among the British colonists, colonial
[Guest]: imperial officers in India because these guys were eligible bachelors, well paid.
[Guest]: And so the fishing fleet would set forth and people would go and find a future husband
[Guest]: among these British officers.
[Guest]: And my great grandfather was an Indian civil service officer who came to India when he
[Guest]: was 21, I think, you know, really young and became an advisor to the Raja of Mandir among
[Guest]: other things.
[Guest]: And he ended up, he was in India for 27, no longer actually, 40 years actually, and ended
[Guest]: up as the financial secretary of Punjab, the United Punjab.
[Guest]: Anyway, at some point in his career, it's sort of late 1890s, I think, he was going
[Guest]: back from India to England for a holiday, sailing through the Suez Canal and stopped
[Guest]: in Cairo.
[Guest]: And my great grandmother, who was actually American, not British, she happened to be
[Guest]: going on a grand tour of, you know, civilization as they might have thought of it then, you
[Guest]: know, Egypt, Italy, Greece, that sort of thing.
[Guest]: And they crossed paths at the pyramids, this young British man and this young American
[Guest]: lady.
[Guest]: But what happened at the pyramids became this kind of contested story in different parts
[Guest]: of the family.
[Guest]: My great grandfather's version was always that he found my grandmother falling off a
[Guest]: donkey off the back of a donkey and managed to rescue her and pick her up and save her
[Guest]: from the disgrace of falling to the ground in the desert in front of the pyramids.
[Guest]: Of course, her version was that he was captivated by how elegantly she had gotten off this
[Guest]: donkey.
[Guest]: At the time, that's what tourists did, you know, when you visited the pyramids, you didn't
[Guest]: go around on a tour bus, you went around on your own donkey.
[Guest]: So the donkey incident became the meeting point between my great grandparents, and this
[Guest]: turned into a romance.
[Guest]: They actually followed each other across the Mediterranean.
[Guest]: And then my great grandmother's diary describes a meeting in St. Mark's Cathedral in Venice,
[Guest]: where she said something, it says something like, and behind the third pillar on the left,
[Guest]: dot, dot, dot, you know, something happened, we don't know exactly what, anyway, they end
[Guest]: up getting married.
[Guest]: And so, ultimately, my great grandmother moved to India with my great grandfather, and they
[Guest]: lived in India for a long time, mostly in Lahore, actually, and that's where my grandfather
[Guest]: was born.
[Guest]: And yeah, that was born in India.
[Amit Varma]: And you were born in Egypt in 1962, I mean, and you weren't born there, sorry, you grew
[Amit Varma]: up there from the age of two.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah, I was actually born in America, in Virginia, and my parents moved to Egypt
[Guest]: when I was two, two years old.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, one of the sort of themes I've touched upon on the show, which I'm sure you've
[Amit Varma]: come across as well, is sort of how we view the passage of time, you know, in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that most of us when we live our lives, we are kind of caught up in the present moment.
[Amit Varma]: Is the passage of time seen or unseen?
[Amit Varma]: It's unseen, but it can become seen if you talk about it on the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: And it's like, you know, you're caught up in the present moment, and it feels like the
[Amit Varma]: present moment is everything.
[Amit Varma]: And it's like when you're 20, you think that 40 is a long way away, you know, 45 is a positively
[Amit Varma]: old man who will even live that long, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And then the years pass and the decades pass, and you look at time in a very different way.
[Amit Varma]: And what you did in in your book, Cairo, is that there are these sort of different spans
[Amit Varma]: of time you're looking at one is, of course, a millennia, through which there is a history
[Amit Varma]: of Cairo itself.
[Amit Varma]: So here you are in the city where you grow up, and you're seeing it all around you.
[Amit Varma]: But you're also aware of all of the history and, you know, everything that's been there
[Amit Varma]: in the past, the cities of the dead, as it were, if I am to now use that term as a metaphor,
[Amit Varma]: you've used it in different ways in your book.
[Amit Varma]: And equally, when you're looking back at your own life, you're kind of looking at, you know,
[Amit Varma]: looking back at the 1890s, when you know, the donkey incident, as it were, happens.
[Amit Varma]: And the distance between the donkey incident and your birth is similar to the distance
[Amit Varma]: between your birth and now, in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: So over the years, have you begun to view time differently?
[Amit Varma]: Does it?
[Amit Varma]: You know, does a writing of a book like that make a difference to that sort of project?
[Amit Varma]: Because I think what the way most people see the world is they just, you know, they normalize
[Amit Varma]: everything the world as it is now, and it's like the current, but just as we tend to view
[Amit Varma]: ourselves as the center of the universe, and everyone else is just instrumental in this
[Amit Varma]: great play where we are the central character, you also view this current moment as kind
[Amit Varma]: of everything.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, just to think that, you know, 10 years ago, we don't have, didn't have so many of
[Amit Varma]: the technological marvels we now take for granted, you know, on our smartphones.
[Amit Varma]: So how has your perception of time sort of changed, you know, through the years?
[Guest]: This is such a fascinating question.
[Guest]: One could go on about that for a great length, because it's constantly changing and constantly
[Guest]: distorting as you get older.
[Guest]: Now I'm pretty ancient.
[Guest]: As you say, I'm 60 years old.
[Guest]: In fact, I just turned 60.
[Guest]: And I hadn't even thought that you're quite right, that that donkey incident is as far
[Guest]: from my birth as I am from my own birth.
[Guest]: In fact, someone was just pointing out a couple of, I think it was last year, was it?
[Guest]: You know, one of these little anecdotal bits of information that the movie Top Gun, you
[Guest]: know, Tom Cruise, you know, as this Navy pilot, you know, wow.
[Guest]: That the distance between the making of that movie and right now, the present, is longer
[Guest]: than the distance between the making of that movie and World War II.
[Unknown]: Wow.
[Unknown]: You know, which is kind of strange.
[Guest]: It's like, wow, there's been a long…
[Amit Varma]: Because when it came out, World War II seemed like ancient history to us.
[Guest]: Ancient history.
[Guest]: No, and you look at that plane that Tom Cruise is flying, it's a sort of F-14 Tomcat, you
[Guest]: know.
[Guest]: And that looks like a modern plane, not so different than what's up in the air these
[Guest]: days.
[Guest]: And it looks totally different from these propeller things that were, you know, bubbling
[Guest]: around in World War II.
[Guest]: So these distances are constantly sort of distorted.
[Guest]: And it's shocking to me when I think back to the things that I remember, because I lived
[Guest]: in Egypt for such a long time, but that are just like, people look at you in bafflement,
[Guest]: you know.
[Guest]: I mean, I can remember traveling up the Nile, and this is, I can remember it clear as day.
[Guest]: I mean, that doesn't seem long ago to me.
[Guest]: When most of the water lifted for irrigation in Egypt was lifted by people using a pivot,
[Guest]: you know, a bucket and pivot system, something called a shadoof, an ancient Egyptian system.
[Guest]: All up and down the Nile, everywhere we'd go, there were people that'd spend most of
[Guest]: their day lifting water, lifting water.
[Guest]: Of course, all replaced by diesel pumps now, etc., etc.
[Guest]: But this is not that long ago, it's well in my lifetime.
[Guest]: Also the Nile, there were traffic jams of beautiful sailboats, I mean, gorgeous feluccas
[Guest]: on the Nile with these sort of Latin sails, these wonderful, very dramatic-looking boats.
[Guest]: Now there's not a single one.
[Guest]: I mean, it's all only except for tourists.
[Guest]: So that's the sort of thing that has changed in my lifetime, and people imagine that I
[Guest]: must be ancient.
[Guest]: In fact, it's not that long ago, really.
[Guest]: So there are constant distortions, but also you kind of run into a point where you enter
[Guest]: the sort of internet age, and the internet age is now ancient history, too, you know?
[Guest]: I know that, for example, my daughter would sometimes get frustrated with me, why can't
[Guest]: you figure out how to use this new bit of something or other?
[Guest]: And I try to explain that that's because this is like the seventh version of a damn word
[Guest]: processor that I've had to kind of adapt to, you know?
[Guest]: So you just kind of get tired of having to constantly adapt to the new, the new, the
[Guest]: new, the new.
[Guest]: It's not just because one is inept, it's just like, how many different iterations of something
[Guest]: can you really bother to get better at?
[Guest]: So you know, we live in such a peculiar world.
[Guest]: And what's around the corner may be something dramatically new, but I'm sure the world around
[Guest]: the corner will also be filled with strangely old, you know, familiar things that never
[Guest]: change.
[Amit Varma]: And does it make you look at the current times differently?
[Amit Varma]: Like it is sort of the mood that I sense around me when I talk to friends when I talk to whoever
[Amit Varma]: is that, you know, that there is a bit of despair at what's happening in the world around
[Amit Varma]: us and so on and so forth, not just in India, but elsewhere as well.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one question again, that I asked my guests is about whether the arc of history
[Amit Varma]: is Martin Luther King said really bends towards something good, like justice or freedom or
[Amit Varma]: whatever, or whether you know, the sample size is too small, and we don't know yet.
[Amit Varma]: Does it make you a bit more equanimous and sort of less emotional?
[Amit Varma]: Because having a written a history book, not a history book, written a book that has history
[Amit Varma]: in it, among many other things, and goes through centuries and centuries and millennia of so
[Amit Varma]: much change, and having, you know, lived around the world and seen so much of it yourself.
[Amit Varma]: What's your sort of kind of perspective on that, or, you know, do you think that there
[Amit Varma]: is something to the direction we are moving in, and so on and so forth?
[Guest]: Well, one of the things that I learned from writing my book about Cairo, which is very
[Guest]: relevant to your question, is how cyclical history can be.
[Guest]: I mean, Cairo is an extraordinary place.
[Guest]: I mean, it's, you know, basically, I don't think there's anything compares 5000 years
[Guest]: of continuous, you know, big city in one place, slightly shifting around, you know, within
[Guest]: the same location, it's always been more or less the capital of Egypt, right there in
[Guest]: the same spot.
[Guest]: And there's a cyclicality to those 5000 years.
[Guest]: The cities have died there, come back and died there and come back.
[Guest]: And one of the chapters of my book, I think, I go through one of the things that repeats
[Guest]: in these cycles is people moaning about the present and saying the past was always much
[Guest]: better.
[Guest]: And I mean, there's some, you know, I found at every single age of Egyptian history, people
[Guest]: were complaining about how dreadful things are now and how much better they used to be.
[Guest]: And the thing is that, for myself, I'm a horrible moaner too, about Cairo, for example, it was
[Guest]: much nicer when I was growing up there than it is now, you know, and the same is true
[Guest]: of many, many places that I've been around the world, that the world is, unfortunately,
[Guest]: the geography of the world is filled with places that I don't really want to go back
[Guest]: to because I'm sure they were nicer, my memories of places better than the reality.
[Guest]: So that does temper one's understanding of the current moment, which I agree with you,
[Guest]: we were all pretty grim these days.
[Guest]: And you know, one would like to think that it's just a mood, you know, and these things
[Guest]: pass.
[Guest]: And there have been times in history where everyone got very gloomy, you know, the post
[Guest]: sort of World War One period, there was a period of real gloom around the world, which
[Guest]: by the way, coincided with the Spanish flu epidemic around the world.
[Guest]: So not so different in some ways than the present.
[Guest]: So there's definitely moods go up and down.
[Guest]: And they're kind of strange times of fairly positive mood all around the world.
[Guest]: Like for example, the 1960s was largely pretty happy in much of the world in many ways, you
[Guest]: know, although I'm sure there were some people who would dispute that, I mean, you know,
[Guest]: in places like Vietnam, it wasn't so great.
[Guest]: But in general, there was sort of, there's sort of optimistic seasons.
[Guest]: And with the 1990s, for example, I think that was quite a cheerful moment for much of the
[Guest]: world too.
[Guest]: A lot of optimism.
[Guest]: You know, if you think about the enthusiasm about the early internet age and what the
[Guest]: internet was, the internet was going to solve everything and it was going to be this zone
[Guest]: of total freedom where everyone was just going to hang out and it was going to be absolutely
[Guest]: wonderful.
[Guest]: And it's amazing how that has turned into this sort of, you know, trepidation and danger
[Guest]: and you know, it's poison.
[Guest]: So that cyclicality is in evidence.
[Guest]: At the same time, the current moment, I mean, there are reasons why we're all grim right
[Guest]: now too.
[Guest]: I mean, and that's a whole other issue.
[Guest]: And I wouldn't want to be, you know, the fact that everything is ultimately cyclical, that
[Guest]: there are mood swings, etc. shouldn't make one be, you know, rosy-eyed about the present.
[Guest]: I mean, we are in a difficult time for the world.
[Guest]: And you know, the responsibilities that are kind of upon us as humanity are particularly
[Guest]: heavy right now, because we can't really claim ignorance, you know, as we used to be able
[Guest]: to.
[Guest]: So knowledge is always, you know, a heavy burden.
[Amit Varma]: Well, I mean, we can't claim ignorance, but we can claim alternative facts, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: And you've got a few eloquent lines about, you know, how every generation whines about
[Amit Varma]: decline where in your book you write, quote, and then reading into Cairo's past, I saw
[Amit Varma]: how foolish it was to fret about its future.
[Amit Varma]: How silly to imagine that this great town could ever decay beyond repair.
[Amit Varma]: The fact that not one generation in Cairo's five millennia of incarnations had failed
[Amit Varma]: to whine about decline, and still the city had endured.
[Amit Varma]: And stop quote, and later you write, quote, invaders have come and gone.
[Amit Varma]: The Asiatic, Hyksos, Libyans, Ethiopians, Assyrians, Persians, Greeks, Romans, Arabs,
[Amit Varma]: Turks, French, British, and recent hordes of tourists.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote, and I guess that last category will always continue to invade.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, so let's kind of go back to your childhood now.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you're born in America, but you're growing up in Cairo.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, what is it like paint a picture of, you know, Cairo in the 1960s?
[Amit Varma]: What was it like?
[Amit Varma]: What was it like for you to grow up in it and discover yourself in it?
[Guest]: It was rather an idyllic childhood in many ways.
[Guest]: I mean, I lived a pretty privileged existence.
[Guest]: My dad was a professor at the American University in Cairo.
[Guest]: And my father's American, my mother's British.
[Guest]: And they were sort of cosseted by the institution, you know, in order to get professors to come
[Guest]: and work there.
[Guest]: The university had its own housing, it had its own sort of carpenter and plumber and
[Guest]: electrician and stuff like that.
[Guest]: And so we had, from much of my childhood, we lived in rather large, nice houses in the
[Guest]: suburb of Cairo, south of Cairo called Maldi, which is very much like a rather idyllic sort
[Guest]: of Indian suburb, you know, of the 1960s.
[Guest]: Big leafy trees, we had 12 mango trees in the garden, I remember, and we had oranges
[Guest]: and grapefruits and various other trees and plants.
[Guest]: And we also had servants, not dads of them, we had a cook who kept putting his, he put
[Guest]: his plastic shoes in the oven to warm them up one winter, and of course, they melted
[Guest]: all over everything.
[Guest]: And I can remember often going, my parents were quite social, and we used to go to parties
[Guest]: a lot and take us kids along sometimes.
[Guest]: So I can sort of remember the smell of hashish and long taxi rides in Cairo with the sound
[Guest]: of the music, you know, in the background, and sailing on the Nile, and yeah, very idyllic.
[Guest]: We were members of the Maldi club, which was the sort of the local little social club,
[Guest]: sporting club in this suburb, which is a very sort of garden suburb.
[Guest]: And in the sporting club, there was an outdoor cinema with a really giant screen, I mean,
[Guest]: a full-sized screen.
[Guest]: And as kids, we used to pay the equivalent of sort of like, you know, sort of three rupees
[Guest]: or something like that for a movie, and watch a full feature movie.
[Guest]: And we had no television, we didn't own a television, but we watched a movie every night
[Guest]: for years and years and years, a lot of them were like cheap Italian spaghetti Westerns
[Guest]: or, you know, various French thriller movies, you know, sort of low-end American movies.
[Guest]: But so I had this kind of cinema education, watching this giant screen for night after
[Guest]: night, which was a fantastically kind of different, I suppose, from growing up with TV.
[Guest]: So that was our kind of exposure to the outside world and, you know, the world of culture.
[Guest]: And otherwise, you know, we were, as I say, coseted and rather happy, I think, in general.
[Guest]: But interrupting all of that, because, you know, Egypt is the Middle East, we were also
[Guest]: interrupted by political events.
[Guest]: And so there was a kind of, Cairo in the 1960s had this kind of slightly, you know, sinister
[Guest]: air of something lurking, going on, you know, there was secret police everywhere, and we
[Guest]: just sort of whispering and talk of spies.
[Guest]: And in fact, in the suburb where we lived, there were ex-Nazis who were helping Egypt
[Guest]: with his rocket program against the Israelis.
[Guest]: And then we were actually interrupted by the 1967 war, which happened when I was five years
[Guest]: old.
[Guest]: And there had been some indication that things were not going well, and I think my parents
[Guest]: were advised it would be better to leave the country for a bit, because it wasn't quite
[Guest]: clear what was going to happen.
[Guest]: And we were actually, we took a boat from Alexandria that went to Beirut, we were in
[Guest]: Lebanon for a few days, and then we took another boat from Beirut to Istanbul.
[Guest]: And we were actually on the ship from Beirut to Istanbul when the 1967 war broke out, when
[Guest]: we had the Six-Day War, and the Israelis conquered the Sinai Peninsula and basically gave Egypt
[Guest]: a terrible defeat.
[Guest]: And yeah, we were on the boat, and it was a Russian boat, and I contracted German measles
[Guest]: on the boat.
[Guest]: I was very sick, and I was found by a Russian doctor who threw me into the quarantine without
[Guest]: telling anyone.
[Guest]: My parents, they thought I was a missing person on the boat.
[Guest]: They didn't know where I was for about 12 hours until they found me in the infirmary
[Amit Varma]: of the ship.
[Guest]: But in any case, when we arrived in Istanbul, it turned out that we couldn't go back to
[Guest]: Cairo.
[Guest]: So that was a bit of drama.
[Guest]: And there were constantly interruptions like that during my childhood.
[Guest]: In the 1973 war, six years later, when the Egyptians did a little bit better against
[Guest]: the Israelis, we actually watched dogfights in the sky over Cairo, and there was bombing
[Guest]: not far from where we were and so on.
[Guest]: So I was always very aware of the sort of turbulent politics.
[Amit Varma]: And like during this time with all this sort of politics and the wars breaking around you
[Amit Varma]: as you're young, you know, how is your view of the world kind of shaping up?
[Amit Varma]: Like at one level, of course, you're too young to understand exactly what's going on.
[Amit Varma]: You are at sea in more ways than one, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, is the initial response to be that, you know, go Egypt, go and you're completely
[Amit Varma]: on Egypt's side and, you know, and later as you sort of go to boarding school, I think
[Amit Varma]: you went to boarding school when you were 14 in the US, you know, how does your view
[Amit Varma]: of sort of politics and the world around you evolve from there?
[Guest]: I think we were just so exposed to this.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, we listened to, you know, the radio was on all the time, just like all
[Guest]: the time, the BBC basically was on all the time.
[Guest]: And I was reading newspapers when I was really young.
[Guest]: And you know, we were, my parents were, you know, educated university type people and
[Guest]: their friends were educated university type people, you know, rather critical of Western
[Guest]: policy everywhere.
[Guest]: And, you know, in the middle of the Arab-Israeli mess, you know, of course, everyone was highly
[Guest]: politicized.
[Guest]: So, we used to think of the Israelis as being these kind of, you know, very alien devils
[Guest]: from far, far away.
[Guest]: And you know, we'd see sort of Egyptian propaganda films, which we didn't take very seriously.
[Guest]: So I think what basically, I got a very critical attitude to virtually everything that I heard
[Guest]: as news.
[Guest]: You know, we used to watch in these great cinemas, this outdoor cinema where we used
[Guest]: to watch films, there were often newsreels, which were kind of, I don't know, I think
[Guest]: Egypt probably still has them, but before every film, there was a newsreel, just like
[Guest]: the British used to do during World War II.
[Guest]: In fact, that's an interesting thing, is how many countries have never really gotten over
[Guest]: World War II, as countries including India and Egypt in a way, that a lot of the habits
[Guest]: and things that the British introduced in wartime have sort of stuck ever since.
[Guest]: But in any case, newsreels were very bombastic with kind of martial music and, you know,
[Guest]: a lot of people saluting and tanks, you know, bouncing across the desert, things like that.
[Guest]: And we just never took it seriously at all.
[Guest]: So I think I grew up being very skeptical of almost everything that I heard.
[Guest]: And we used to occasionally go back to America or to England in summers and so on, so forth.
[Guest]: And it all seemed almost kind of fantasy of, you know, that they lived in a bubble of peace
[Guest]: and security that just seems so far from the kind of dangers that we sort of grew up thinking
[Guest]: were quite normal.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit more about the texture of those days growing up in Egypt, because
[Amit Varma]: obviously, you know, these days, we sort of take the internet for granted, take the fact
[Amit Varma]: that we're surrounded by entertainment, any book we want, any music we want, any film
[Amit Varma]: we want, it's all at our disposal.
[Amit Varma]: But how would a typical day be for you?
[Amit Varma]: Like, of course, you're watching a movie in the evening, as you mentioned.
[Amit Varma]: But apart from that, how would a typical day be for you?
[Amit Varma]: You know, you were reading newspapers as well.
[Amit Varma]: But what kind of books were you reading?
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, were you in that sense, different from the people around you, by which I mean
[Amit Varma]: was sort of your university community or the expat community kind of different?
[Amit Varma]: You know, you've mentioned in your book, you had a friend called Ashraf, who you, you know,
[Amit Varma]: spoke about as, you know, being from the other Cairo, as it were, right, right, right.
[Amit Varma]: So what were the sort of, you know, how would you spend your days?
[Amit Varma]: How do you think he would spend his days?
[Guest]: What's going in there?
[Guest]: That's an important point.
[Guest]: Because I mean, the fact is that, you know, when I was a real kid, you know, up until
[Guest]: the age of sort of 18, or something like that, or 14, rather, because then I went to boarding
[Guest]: school later on, we lived in quite a bubble, frankly.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, I went to first, I went to a French school, then I went to an American
[Guest]: school.
[Guest]: And my friends were mostly my own friends, my parents' friends were mixed up in, you
[Guest]: know, it's not as if most of their friends were Egyptians.
[Guest]: But because the schools that I went to were international, and there were rules for Egyptians
[Guest]: not being allowed to attend international schools.
[Guest]: So my friends tended to be a completely random mix of international people, as in many other
[Guest]: international schools.
[Guest]: So my friends were Yugoslav, Korean, Swedish, some Americans, but mostly other stuff, English,
[Guest]: you know, a complete scrambled up mix.
[Guest]: I had Pakistani friends, I had, you know, so the kids that I grew up with were mostly
[Guest]: of that sort of ilk.
[Guest]: And you know, in the sporting club, I did have Egyptian friends, but they weren't people
[Guest]: that I went to school with.
[Guest]: So it's a different sort of, you know, relationship and bonding.
[Guest]: So, you know, quite frankly, as a kid, it was an expat bubble.
[Guest]: And we used to go into Cairo as an adventure, you know, used to take the train into Cairo,
[Guest]: into the city, and we'd sometimes like go to the movies.
[Guest]: But we would be sort of, you know, basically little foreign kids on an adventure in this
[Guest]: wild big city.
[Guest]: So that all changed later.
[Guest]: It was later, and at the time also, I didn't learn Arabic properly as a kid, also partly
[Guest]: because we left the country and came back and left and came back and left.
[Guest]: We had to leave during the 67 war, and I was five years old.
[Guest]: And we were away for four years.
[Guest]: I came back when I was nine years old, and then left when I was 14.
[Guest]: So there was in and out, and at each stage, one sort of like lose, you know, contact and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: And I didn't actually move back to Egypt properly until I was 19 years old.
[Guest]: And it was only then that I properly learned Arabic.
[Guest]: And then I had a completely different relationship with Egypt and with Cairo than I did as a
[Guest]: child.
[Guest]: So, you know, at that age, in my 20s, I had, you know, obviously a very different experience.
[Guest]: And it was at that stage that I, you know, my circle of friends became very largely Egyptians.
[Guest]: And I learned Arabic properly and really immersed myself in Cairo, in a way that was just radically
[Amit Varma]: different.
[Amit Varma]: And would you, would you say Cairo was home for you then?
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, one question I again, ask my guests is about what they consider home
[Amit Varma]: or what their sense of home is.
[Amit Varma]: And for a lot of people, they may be nothing of that sort.
[Amit Varma]: And in your case, you're an American in Cairo, so you're not entirely Egyptian.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, you're not entirely American either.
[Amit Varma]: You know, so, you know, when you think of home, is it Cairo you think of?
[Guest]: Yes, and no, I mean, the fact is that the Cairo that I consider home doesn't exist anymore.
[Guest]: I mean, there's a sort of it's, it's, it just sort of lives on a plane, as I was saying
[Guest]: about, you know, places that you don't want to go back to, because they've changed so
[Guest]: much that, you know.
[Guest]: So the Cairo of now is really very different.
[Guest]: I mean, and just to give an example, when I was a kid growing up, I just remember one
[Guest]: one occasion, a friend of mine who was Dutch, I think he was the son of the Dutch ambassador
[Guest]: or something like that.
[Guest]: And his dad was trying to quiz us, we were sort of 11 years old and sort of, okay, boys,
[Guest]: tell me what is the population of Egypt?
[Guest]: And I very cleverly said, it's 33 million.
[Guest]: And he said, very good, very good, very good.
[Guest]: Do you know what the population of Egypt is going to be in 2000?
[Guest]: And I said, no, I don't know.
[Guest]: And he said, it's going to be 70 million.
[Guest]: I was like, oh, come on, you know, that's not possible, impossible.
[Guest]: How could it be 70 million people?
[Guest]: And of course, now the population of Egypt is 110 million.
[Guest]: So the Cairo that I knew as a kid was a place that was, you know, a big city in a medium
[Guest]: sized country.
[Guest]: Now Egypt is a country of the population is more than triple.
[Guest]: And it's changed the nature of the place radically.
[Guest]: It's just a very, very different kind of, it's a far more sort of urban place with bigger
[Guest]: distances to grow through endless traffic.
[Guest]: And it's just has a different feel entirely, and doesn't feel like home, you know, the
[Guest]: places that I used to go to in summer is to the beach, wonderful beaches in Egypt, pretty
[Guest]: absolutely gorgeous beaches on the Mediterranean.
[Guest]: And they're, you know, now, just not nice.
[Guest]: I mean, they're just one of one place we used to go, there was a steel mill built there,
[Guest]: you know, so you can imagine what that's like.
[Guest]: Yeah, there's a lot that's just kind of lost.
[Guest]: So the whole question of home is a bit fuzzy.
[Guest]: I mean, I kind of have to make it up.
[Guest]: And I think I sort of have many different versions of something that's home-like.
[Guest]: And I'm basically most at home in my own house.
[Guest]: And there's certain like smells that you suddenly smell something you think, oh, wow, that brings
[Guest]: back childhood or something like that.
[Guest]: You know, sort of like the famous, you know, Madeleines from Proust, you know, brings back
[Guest]: a whole range of things with the smell of one thing, but I don't really have a place
[Guest]: called home.
[Guest]: And I'm sure like in the future, I'm actually, you know, leaving India after six years here.
[Guest]: But there are things that I'm sure there are certain smells and sounds that will come back.
[Guest]: And I'll immediately think home, but I'll be thinking it'll be India.
[Guest]: I mean, for example, I hear the sound of birds in Delhi, which is quite spectacular.
[Guest]: I mean, it's an amazing racket of sounds.
[Guest]: Or if I hear the sound of another sound that's very constant in India is the sound of people
[Guest]: sweeping, you know, just the sort of swish, swish, swish of people sweeping on the street.
[Guest]: You'll feel like home immediately.
[Guest]: And that home will be an India that I remember, you know.
[Guest]: So that's a complicated answer.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, and there's a lovely quote in your book again, where you write, quote,
[Amit Varma]: If Cairo was, in the words of his great novelist and Nobel laureate Naguib Mahfouz, like meeting
[Amit Varma]: your beloved in old age, then was I to tell about her wrinkles, her bad breath and worst
[Amit Varma]: taste, and her unfortunate habit of shouting at the servants?
[Amit Varma]: Because just as one could expand on the city's wonders, its pyramids and minarets and showbiz
[Amit Varma]: glitter, one could also mutter over its noise and pollution and sheer beveldering, annoying
[Amit Varma]: clutter.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And there is also, you know, another quote later about Cairo, which struck me as something
[Amit Varma]: that is possibly true of any city, any old city, where you write, especially in India,
[Amit Varma]: where you write, quote, The fact is a city which is so astoundingly old is also surprisingly
[Amit Varma]: young.
[Amit Varma]: In the past centuries, population has fallen by a factor of 25.
[Amit Varma]: Crowding is twice what it was in 1950.
[Amit Varma]: It's three times the level of 1920, when the city housed barely a million people.
[Amit Varma]: A third of Cairines are under the age of 15.
[Amit Varma]: Few remember the statelier ways of a mere generation ago, let alone give more than a
[Amit Varma]: passing shrug for ancient glories.
[Amit Varma]: Except, that is, when it comes to inflating the aura of the pharaohs to prime the lucrative
[Amit Varma]: curiosity of foreign tourists.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And what you said earlier is also, is evocative to me, because my sense of home is also perhaps,
[Amit Varma]: you know, not rooted so much in geography as in a certain kind of vibe, you know.
[Amit Varma]: And then the question is, where do you find that vibe and to some extent, you can construct
[Amit Varma]: it within your own home, you know, but outside perhaps, that isn't there and that may not
[Amit Varma]: be either a good thing or a bad thing.
[Amit Varma]: You mentioned a couple of things about Delhi, which is the sound of the birds and the sound
[Amit Varma]: of the sweeping, right?
[Amit Varma]: So which is, so that leads me to a couple of related digressive questions and we'll
[Amit Varma]: come back to biography later.
[Amit Varma]: One of those is that, you know, these are both things that I've never noticed while
[Amit Varma]: in Delhi.
[Amit Varma]: I simply haven't noticed them.
[Amit Varma]: But when you mention them, immediately the sound of sweeping came into my head, right?
[Amit Varma]: I completely get it.
[Amit Varma]: But it's, you could say that it was unseen to me as such.
[Amit Varma]: I never focused on it.
[Amit Varma]: And something that I meant to ask you when we spoke about India was that coming here
[Amit Varma]: from outside, you know, coming here from a country that is also old and messy and all
[Amit Varma]: of that and going through a lot of change, coming here from outside, and therefore not
[Amit Varma]: having normalized everything.
[Amit Varma]: What is it that strikes you about maybe Delhi, maybe India, that you feel Indians don't even
[Amit Varma]: notice that they just take for granted that it's unseen to them, you know, like you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: the sound of the birds and the sound of the sweeping, you know, which are sounds but apart
[Amit Varma]: from that, in general, as a general question, what do we miss?
[Guest]: That's an interesting question because I think there are layers to that.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, one thing that, I mean, I find, because I've done a lot of traveling
[Guest]: and also as a journalist, you know, when I was in the Middle East, I covered a lot of
[Guest]: countries and I had to go to completely new countries and sort of get up to speed very
[Guest]: quickly.
[Guest]: So you realize that your first impressions are very important.
[Guest]: And it's like meeting a person, you know, your first impressions are really strong.
[Guest]: And so with India, yeah, some of my first impressions are things that I don't even
[Guest]: notice now.
[Guest]: So I know exactly what you mean, that if you say that Indians miss these things, I miss
[Guest]: them too, because now I've gotten used to it, it doesn't mean anything.
[Guest]: But just, I mean, I relate a couple of things.
[Guest]: One is when I first got here, there's a kind of the presence of the very poor, the like
[Guest]: really, really super poor was something that, you know, this is nothing new that I'm saying
[Guest]: about India.
[Guest]: And this is, you know, but there's a sort of strange quality to the fact that just going
[Guest]: around Delhi, some of these posh, you know, colonies that I was living in, there were
[Guest]: adjacent bastis full of people who are living at a different level.
[Guest]: There's nothing, you know, I mean, that's nothing, that's not a shock or surprise to
[Guest]: me coming from Cairo.
[Guest]: And, you know, there's nothing that I find striking about that.
[Guest]: What was striking in India though, is how invisible those people feel themselves to
[Guest]: be, you know, they sort of shrink from contact in a strange way.
[Guest]: And often even, you know, in Delhi, I would find that some of the very poor, actually,
[Guest]: their color is washed out, partly because their clothes aren't, or they can't wash their
[Guest]: clothes or their very old clothes, their clothes are colorless, you know, their faces are gray,
[Guest]: they look unhealthy.
[Guest]: I mean, there's a kind of strange black and whiteness to the very poor, which I just found
[Guest]: really striking when I first came here.
[Guest]: And now I don't see it anymore because I'm used to this, you know.
[Guest]: So that is one thing.
[Guest]: But another first impression coming from many, often people would say to me when meeting
[Guest]: a Western-looking foreigner arriving here, they'd say, oh, how are you getting used to
[Guest]: our chaos here in India and the heat?
[Guest]: And I was like, well, I've done chaos already, and I've done heat already, and there's nothing
[Guest]: new about that.
[Guest]: And in fact, I found India to be rather orderly and pretty impressive, actually, in many ways.
[Guest]: And, you know, I think the things that India does well and that work well, people get used
[Guest]: to and kind of forget about.
[Guest]: But coming in from another sort of so-called developing, so-called third world-ish country,
[Guest]: India is just so far ahead in terms of things like the digital world, digital technology,
[Guest]: the use of digital stuff in banking, in all kinds of ways.
[Guest]: You know, a lot of the infrastructure in India, people complain, and it's true, roads are
[Guest]: bad, but I mean, getting around by plane in India is pretty damn good, actually.
[Guest]: I mean, it's impressive.
[Guest]: So I was actually impressed by a lot of things in the sense of things working quite well.
[Guest]: And also, you know, as a journalist coming from the Middle East, where I spent most of
[Guest]: my career, I found that I was suddenly arriving in a free country.
[Guest]: I'd never worked in a so-called free country where you can actually call a ministry and
[Guest]: ask for a quote and so on and so forth, where there's expected to be some response from
[Guest]: the government or some kind of accountability is kind of expected.
[Guest]: This was all new to me and kind of like, wow.
[Guest]: So I think people take for granted some of those things.
[Guest]: Of course, you know, that's all changing over time.
[Guest]: I mean, in the years that I've been in India, many of those things have changed.
[Guest]: But I'm just speaking of first impressions there.
[Guest]: There are other things, I mean, one of the things that I think is surprising about India
[Guest]: to someone coming from outside is how washed out the sky is often in India.
[Guest]: It's a rather strange thing.
[Guest]: You don't notice it when you've been here for a while, but if you've flown from one
[Guest]: end of India to many times, and you look out the window and often all you see is just haze,
[Guest]: which is a strange thing.
[Guest]: You get used to that here.
[Guest]: But I kind of, particularly in Delhi, of course, with the pollution, one misses the really
[Guest]: blue, blue skies, bright blue skies, and there's often a kind of fuzz, as if there's a filter
[Guest]: over the lens in India, which is rather strange.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and that's actually a striking observation about black and white.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll have to, you know, start noticing that.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I do, of course, say that, you know, if you're sitting in a car and you're driving
[Amit Varma]: by, the beggar at the traffic signal is always unseen to you.
[Amit Varma]: That's just kind of how we are.
[Amit Varma]: Another observation I made, and at the time I made it, it took me rather by surprise,
[Amit Varma]: was in the mid 90s, when I first came to Mumbai, or Bombay as it then was, and I would travel
[Amit Varma]: by local train, and I'd noticed traveling from first class, and first class and second
[Amit Varma]: class are almost equally crowded, first class is mildly better.
[Amit Varma]: But you're basically just standing in the heat and you're surrounded by people.
[Amit Varma]: But I noticed a height difference, that people in first class were always an inch or two
[Amit Varma]: taller than people in second class.
[Amit Varma]: And when you notice that, and you realize why that is, nutrition, poverty, all of that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, that kind of strikes you because it is there, again, visible, you know, and
[Amit Varma]: once it's visible, it's sort of tragic.
[Amit Varma]: And then of course, you learn to kind of unsee it again, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: The other sort of question, and we'll come back to India and talk about it much more
[Amit Varma]: later, of course.
[Amit Varma]: But the other question I had arising from your mention of birdsong and the sound of
[Amit Varma]: sweeping is something that I noticed in your book and in your writings, though much more
[Amit Varma]: in your book on Cairo than in your journalism, because I guess there's no place for it in
[Amit Varma]: your, there's not so much space for it in journalism, is your acute skills of observation
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that what you're seeing, and what you're hearing, and all of that is, you
[Amit Varma]: know, so kind of acute, which is exactly, you know, where you sort of, which is, you
[Amit Varma]: know, an example of that is a birdsong and the sound of sweeping.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I'll quote this passage from your book where you speak about your early
[Amit Varma]: memories after you arrived here at the age of two, where you write, quote, what I remember
[Amit Varma]: is heady colour bursts of Bougainvillea crimson, jacaranda violet, and flame tree red, and
[Amit Varma]: the glistening blackness of olives at the Greece grocer, I remember the crackling urgency
[Amit Varma]: of backgammon dice and cafes and the tooting insistence of human, animal and motorized
[Amit Varma]: traffic.
[Amit Varma]: I remember the glamour of St. Lawrence of Arabia open at that art deco jewel of a cinema,
[Amit Varma]: the metro on Suleiman Pasha Street, and the sheer fun of hurling potatoes into the gaptooth
[Amit Varma]: maw of a hippo at the zoo, still elegant then with its pathways in Portuguese mosaic and
[Amit Varma]: laminates served beside the still lush lotus ponds, and so on, you carry on like this for
[Amit Varma]: a while.
[Amit Varma]: And these are so remarkably vivid and here, and the thing here is that how many of these
[Amit Varma]: memories are sort of in retrospect, when you're looking back and you remember those things,
[Amit Varma]: and then you make these notes, you know, Bougainvillea crimson, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And how many of these are sort of ingrained, you are a noticing kind of person, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you can either be sort of, I guess, a noticer who's noticing everything anyway, or you can
[Amit Varma]: train yourself to notice things because you're a writer or a journalist, and it's your job.
[Amit Varma]: So you hear a new sound, it goes into the notebook in your head, oh, the sound of sweeping,
[Amit Varma]: you know.
[Amit Varma]: So what's that like?
[Guest]: Well, I think, you know, that's an important question, because in fact, a lot of this noticing
[Guest]: doesn't happen so much because you notice, it happens because of the process of writing,
[Guest]: you know, that it's all there.
[Guest]: You just have to draw it out and get into the right mood and let it flow.
[Guest]: And you'll find that you have noticed a lot more than you realized you noticed.
[Guest]: And also, that's one of the, you know, sort of pleasures of writing is that you can pull
[Guest]: these things out of yourself.
[Guest]: No one would ask you this normally, unless it was Amit Verma, who gives you five hours
[Guest]: to talk, you know, which is very rare privilege.
[Guest]: But you know, I think one notices as one goes along, and there's certain kinds of people
[Guest]: who do make an effort to record and notice every little detail and really, you know,
[Guest]: sort of soak it up.
[Guest]: And I'm not particularly one of those people, but as I say, in the process of then recreating
[Guest]: and trying to paint the picture for someone else with words, that's what comes out.
[Guest]: Because you know, this is what you need to sort of convey, the thing that you're trying
[Guest]: to talk about.
[Guest]: That's what makes it tactile and convincing and real.
[Guest]: And so you want to find and do that in the most succinct way possible.
[Guest]: And to be succinct, you need everything, you need color, smell, you know, everything is
[Guest]: a big package.
[Guest]: So there wasn't an effort of noticing, there's an effort of recalling that comes out because
[Guest]: of the writing.
[Guest]: At the same time, though, I think the act of noticing is really important.
[Guest]: I mean, that is one of the things that, you know, the sort of profession that I'm in allows
[Guest]: one to do.
[Guest]: I mean, you do have to pay attention and you do have to take notice.
[Guest]: I mean, even in the profession of being a journalist, you look at the expressions of
[Guest]: the person you're talking to, you look at what rings they're wearing, you know, everything
[Guest]: counts in trying to assess what you're dealing with in the world.
[Guest]: So you do have to do a great deal of observation.
[Guest]: And it is useful to sort of be trained in observation.
[Guest]: I'm not particularly keen.
[Guest]: I find that other people have noticed things and I'm completely oblivious to crucial things
[Guest]: that have been said.
[Guest]: I also tend to be slightly more visual.
[Guest]: I often find that I miss spoken words and wasn't quite paying attention, but I'll get
[Guest]: the visual stuff very clearly and miss the verbal.
[Guest]: People that I know are much more acute in catching every single little nuance of what's
[Guest]: being said.
[Guest]: So that's important.
[Guest]: And I wonder sometimes if my lack of sort of verbal acuteness might be partly having
[Guest]: lived in too many different countries with too many different languages, where very,
[Guest]: very often the sound of speaking in the background is something you know you're not going to
[Guest]: be understanding.
[Guest]: So you don't try to overhear, you know, you don't try to eavesdrop if you just know it's
[Guest]: all gobbledygook, which is, you know, what happens to people who are not from Kerala
[Guest]: when they listen to lots of people yakking away on the streets in Kochi, you just don't
[Guest]: know what's going on.
[Guest]: So you don't pay attention as a result.
[Guest]: And you know, as for the visual, you know, I've always been something of an aesthete.
[Guest]: I like art, I always like movies, so I'm always on the lookout for something that's memorably
[Guest]: beautiful or striking or, you know, some contrast that really leaps out.
[Guest]: So there is a, there's a bit of an effort at observing, but actually the kind of granular
[Guest]: detail that you're talking about, that comes out of the process of writing about it rather
[Amit Varma]: than just trying to record it.
[Amit Varma]: And were there movies that you saw, you know, in your sort of daily movie watching, which
[Amit Varma]: really struck you and at around what point would it be that you got interested in writing,
[Amit Varma]: for example?
[Amit Varma]: Was it an accidental thing, or was it right from when you could read, you had the sense
[Amit Varma]: that, hey, this is something I want to do?
[Guest]: It was pretty much from the get go, I think, in many ways.
[Guest]: I actually, I was torn.
[Guest]: In terms of professions that I wanted to do, they were ranked, I want to be a movie director
[Guest]: first and an architect second, and a writer kind of trailed in the background as a kind
[Guest]: of loser option.
[Guest]: So movie director, that sort of faded out as soon as I realized what a pain in the ass
[Guest]: it is to actually have to deal with the number of people you have to deal with when you make
[Guest]: a movie.
[Guest]: I mean, a director has to deal with thousands of people, all of them difficult, all of them.
[Guest]: It's kind of a nightmare job.
[Guest]: So I have a lot of respect for directors who survive as directors and then even make good
[Guest]: movies.
[Guest]: It's amazing, actually, because it's a process of collaboration that's just very demanding.
[Guest]: And I've always been more of a sort of loner creator than that.
[Guest]: That would never have worked.
[Guest]: But in terms of movies that were influential, it's more styles of movies.
[Guest]: I really liked, there was a certain kind of French kind of thriller movie from the early
[Guest]: 70s with Alain Delon, you know, quiet music in the background, a little bit bloody, but
[Guest]: a bit cool, very cool, but convoluted plots, a little bit film noir.
[Guest]: I really liked some of those actors.
[Guest]: Those films were very influential.
[Guest]: Yeah, I remember when The Godfather came out, for example, that was great, it was very good.
[Guest]: And there was a certain kind of, I watched a lot of Italian spaghetti Westerns, including
[Guest]: the ones that afterwards became famous.
[Guest]: At the time, we thought they were just more cheap movies, like the Sergio Leone ones,
[Guest]: Once Upon a Time in the West and so on, that became kind of iconic.
[Guest]: At the time, they were just more spaghetti Westerns.
[Guest]: So those were a lot of fun.
[Guest]: But I always liked thrillers and detective films.
[Guest]: We also, because of the era that I grew up in, we saw an awful lot of war movies.
[Guest]: There were just lots and lots of war movies.
[Guest]: So those were exciting, but they didn't grab me in quite the same way.
[Guest]: But I got absolutely indoctrinated with all the sort of Cold War triumph of the Allies
[Guest]: against the Nazis and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: And we never heard anything about what Russia had got up to in World War II, for example.
[Guest]: When you only learned that later, the version of World War II we had was that the Americans
[Guest]: were the good guys who rescued everybody.
[Guest]: So that was amusing.
[Guest]: And there was another phase of movie watching.
[Guest]: We moved to America after the 67 war when we were living in America as a little kid.
[Guest]: Suddenly we had television.
[Guest]: And so we became devils and just watched television all the time.
[Guest]: But there was a program on Saturday afternoons called Creature Feature that had three back-to-back
[Guest]: horror movies.
[Guest]: And these were cheap, black and white horror movies from the 1950s, Godzilla, a lot of
[Guest]: Japanese monster movies, and really, really bad, bad American movies, Monster from the
[Guest]: Black Lagoon, you know.
[Guest]: Those were also influential.
[Guest]: And we liked just sort of surrendering to watch this, you know, ghastly gore.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And what kind of writers did you like reading?
[Guest]: Well, I went through different phases.
[Guest]: I mean, I was always a voracious reader.
[Guest]: You know, I was one of these kids who'd like read one Agatha Christie book and then just
[Guest]: not stop until I read them all.
[Guest]: So I just had a wall of Agatha Christie in my room.
[Guest]: I eventually collected them all.
[Guest]: I used to go to bookshops all over Cairo to find the ones that were missing.
[Guest]: You know, English murder mysteries was big on the list for a long time.
[Guest]: And I also liked thrillers at the time.
[Guest]: But you know, tastes change a lot.
[Guest]: I think probably between the ages of like, I don't know, eight and 12, 13, 14, my absolute
[Guest]: favorite was Tintin, Tintin, which I used to read in French or English.
[Guest]: But that was, I think if there's any influence on me, you know, in many ways, that's the
[Guest]: strongest one, because those, you know, sort of cartoon books, bonds de ciné, as they
[Guest]: call them in French, they're somewhere between a movie and a book.
[Guest]: And the way those Tintin books were written was totally with a cinematic kind of understanding
[Guest]: and sensibility.
[Guest]: I mean, he was, Hergé, who wrote those books, was a film director, Manqué, who ended up
[Guest]: working by himself to make movies in books, sort of like I was saying, he maybe discovered
[Guest]: that making films is too complicated.
[Guest]: But you know, if you look at those books carefully, they're designed so that at the end of every
[Guest]: page there's always a little bit of a moment of suspense.
[Guest]: There's always a little bit of humor, there's always a little bit of, you know, and it's
[Guest]: full of gags that are straight from the movies of the time, you know, Buster Keaton or Charlie
[Guest]: Chaplin, you'd find the same kind of gags in Tintin books.
[Guest]: And incidentally, I always find it amusing that quite a lot of what happens in Tintin
[Guest]: later on happened kind of in real life and in rather odd ways.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, things like having bombs on airplanes, you know, that was something
[Guest]: he made up and hadn't happened yet.
[Guest]: And then, you know, it happens in our lifetime that that becomes quite a normal thing, people
[Guest]: start blowing up flying aircraft and many other little bits and pieces.
[Guest]: And those books have also been sort of seminal because a lot of the characters in Tintin's
[Guest]: books are very strong, you know, they're cartoons, so they're slightly larger than life or exaggerated
[Guest]: characters.
[Guest]: But I've met an astonishing number of people that I've known in real life who are astonishingly
[Guest]: like the people in Tintin, look the same, act the same or equally exaggerated, and sometimes
[Guest]: just as silly.
[Amit Varma]: Well, you're a journalist and you're nothing like, you don't look like Tintin perhaps in
[Amit Varma]: other aspects.
[Amit Varma]: Tintin, Agatha Christie, I mean, these are, you know, whenever I talk to guests of my
[Amit Varma]: vintage from India, I realized we grew up on the same things because you only had so
[Amit Varma]: many, so much stuff around.
[Amit Varma]: So as a little kid, you might read your, you know, your Enid Blyton and your Hardy Boys
[Amit Varma]: and you kind of grow a little older and you're reading Tintin and Asterix.
[Guest]: I was forbidden to read Enid Blyton.
[Guest]: Why is that?
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Unknown]: My mother said, no, she's terrible.
[Unknown]: You can't read that.
[Guest]: Oh.
[Guest]: She'd literally get them out of the house to take them away.
[Guest]: She wouldn't allow them.
[Amit Varma]: And I see it of a different sort.
[Amit Varma]: And by the way, for those of my readers who also like Agatha Christie or who read Agatha
[Amit Varma]: Christie once upon a time, there's a great book I'll recommend and put in the show notes
[Amit Varma]: called The Golden Age of Murder by Martin Edwards.
[Unknown]: Have you read it?
[Unknown]: No, I haven't.
[Amit Varma]: It's that entire period and that entire sort of school of crime writing, you know, before
[Amit Varma]: the Scandinavians came and they, you know, took it in a different direction and so on
[Amit Varma]: and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: So sort of a fascinating book, which is also like a portal of rabbit holes, because while
[Amit Varma]: reading that book, I must have bought some 20, 25 other books just to figure out the
[Amit Varma]: other sort of crime fiction of that era.
[Guest]: A lot of them are just as good, actually.
[Unknown]: Not as prolific.
[Guest]: I mean, Agatha Christie took the cake in terms of just numbers and just sheer volume.
[Guest]: I used to read some of those others at the same time.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And so here's the thing that I realized that people in our generation, and I'm sorry for
[Amit Varma]: listeners if this sounds too sort of back in my day kind of nostalgia, but I'm coming
[Amit Varma]: at a broader sort of point here, which is that people like you and I can meet and you
[Amit Varma]: grew up in Egypt and I grew up in India, and we are 12 years apart, I'm 48, and we can
[Amit Varma]: figure out this common base, this common sort of source of cultural understanding where
[Amit Varma]: we, you know, share much of that, whether it's Tintin or Asterix and Agatha Christie.
[Amit Varma]: And if we keep talking, I'm sure that even our journey through literature and through
[Amit Varma]: music would have, you know, in certain ways, gone along similar lines.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't think that's the case today where people have that shared bedrock of cultural
[Amit Varma]: understanding.
[Amit Varma]: Like in a way, I think it's good that everywhere across different fields, the mainstream has
[Amit Varma]: disintegrated.
[Amit Varma]: So you've seen that in media, and we'll talk about that also later in that context.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, in media, the mainstream is kind of disintegrated, there's no consensus
[Amit Varma]: on the truth, everyone has a means of production.
[Amit Varma]: And that's net net really positive, but there are negative effects, of course, and so on
[Amit Varma]: and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And I think that's happened in the culture also, like I'm just thinking aloud here.
[Amit Varma]: But after Harry Potter, what has really been mainstream in that sense, you know, earlier
[Amit Varma]: when we were chatting during lunch, I told you about Brandon Sanderson, who is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: more prolific than you during the lockdown, wrote four books.
[Amit Varma]: And then did this whole crowdfunding thing, where he just went online, and he said, I
[Amit Varma]: don't want to give it to a publisher, I'll give it to anyone who pays for it now.
[Amit Varma]: And I love membership tiers and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And he raised some $45 million last I heard, it might be more now.
[Amit Varma]: And you hadn't heard of Brandon Sanderson, right?
[Amit Varma]: And that's not unusual, right, that an author so big is still nevertheless, you're very
[Amit Varma]: well known in a certain community, and not at all, and nobody else knows you at all.
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: So like, for example, not to make any kind of comparison, but on a much, much smaller
[Amit Varma]: scale, my podcast for many people, it'll, you know, be part of their lives.
[Amit Varma]: But where I live in Warsaw, in seven bungalows in the filmy world of Bombay, nobody would
[Amit Varma]: have heard of me, they won't have the slightest clue who I am, right, which is perhaps a wrong
[Amit Varma]: example, because this would be a category error anyway.
[Amit Varma]: But what I'm coming at is that everything in our culture has kind of fragmented.
[Amit Varma]: So there is no mainstream.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, there are no common links, everybody is kind of on their own lane on
[Amit Varma]: their own path.
[Amit Varma]: You know, if you like, my YouTube channel could, you know, my YouTube with this algorithm
[Amit Varma]: skater to my preferences could show me something completely different from, you know, the person
[Amit Varma]: who lives next door.
[Amit Varma]: So and recently, I remember this thread on this email group, I'm part of someone started
[Amit Varma]: a thread asking on the lines of that, you know, I have some interests, which nobody
[Amit Varma]: shares with me, I feel so alone, what are the interests you have, which nobody shares
[Amit Varma]: with you, and you're totally alone.
[Amit Varma]: And the point was that, interestingly, in a physical way, all the friends, you know,
[Amit Varma]: physically, none of them might share that online, you can find people like that.
[Amit Varma]: So and here, I'm just totally thinking aloud, this is not a sort of a preplanned question.
[Amit Varma]: But what do you sort of think of this fragmentation of culture and cultural influences?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, what does it?
[Amit Varma]: What are your thoughts on it?
[Guest]: No, I think you're quite right.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, you know, of course, it varies from country to country.
[Guest]: And you know, there's also a class element, what class of people you are to get what kind
[Guest]: of dose of what sort of culture from, but there's no question that it's fragmented immensely.
[Guest]: I mean, it's fragmented slightly different ways in different countries.
[Guest]: I mean, I think of, you know, America is the easiest place to think of because it's the
[Guest]: biggest sort of mass culture that's been going on for quite a long time.
[Guest]: But you know, when I was in America as a kid, and even later on, you know, there were three
[Guest]: networks, you know, ABC, CBS, NBC, and there was something called broadcasting, you know,
[Guest]: which means exactly what it was broad, you know, casting, and everyone got the same stuff.
[Guest]: You'd go to someone's house, and they'd have three channels that had, you know, some variation
[Guest]: of the three main channels, and maybe some local bits and bobs, but that was really basically
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: And those three channels were also competing to deliver very much the same kind of stuff,
[Guest]: you know, and so the news wouldn't be radically different from one to the next channel, you
[Guest]: know, they'd be the same sort of mainstream version of events that was cast at you.
[Guest]: So the voting public in a place like the US had a pretty similar take on what was going
[Guest]: on.
[Guest]: You know, there's something in common there.
[Guest]: And as you say, it's fragmented, you know, radically.
[Guest]: So there's no such thing as broadcasting anymore.
[Guest]: It's all narrow casting now.
[Guest]: And it's people, you know, getting into their own village and being algorithmed into some
[Guest]: box, basically.
[Guest]: So you don't really hear much alternative to what appears to be your preference.
[Guest]: And yeah, that's an entirely different world in a place like America.
[Guest]: In the wider world, you know, I think people are, this is happening in different ways in
[Guest]: different countries, you know, but we're definitely shaken up.
[Guest]: And I suppose, you know, people like yourself and myself, we belong to, you know, living
[Guest]: in very different countries, slightly different ages, sure, sure, sure.
[Guest]: But we belong to a kind of international, you know, sort of class of people who are
[Guest]: sort of absorbing broadcast, you know, Western culture to a large, large extent.
[Guest]: You know, which isn't, you know, there's nothing wrong with that, it's fine.
[Guest]: But we certainly have access to more interesting variety now.
[Guest]: So that's a positive side is just the accessibility of so much different stuff, which is amazing.
[Guest]: I mean, it is amazing.
[Guest]: But the lack of commonality has implications that are obviously, we haven't come to terms
[Guest]: with.
[Guest]: And it's obviously causing a lot of trouble in the world, actually.
[Guest]: I mean, that's the root cause of so much political turmoil in many, many different
[Guest]: countries, in fact, all over the place, is the lack of commonality to information, you
[Guest]: know.
[Guest]: And it's not like we should all be reading Pravda, you know, every morning and listening
[Guest]: to Durdarshan, you know, sort of.
[Guest]: But having a common understanding is important for building nations, you know, to a certain
[Guest]: extent.
[Guest]: And this fragmentation can be, you know, dangerous to the fabric of a society, but also, you
[Guest]: know, it can take on this kind of nasty polarization, which can have ill effects in that people
[Guest]: are strident about what they believe in, what they think is reality, because it's never
[Guest]: challenged.
[Guest]: And they never have to be challenged.
[Guest]: It's always something new.
[Guest]: But I don't know quite what one is to do about that, you know.
[Guest]: We perhaps lived in a moment when that was unusual.
[Guest]: It's interesting, you know, you go back to different technologies.
[Guest]: There was, you know, an old book market in Cairo, I bought this rather wonderful book
[Guest]: that I'm afraid some, you know, drunken friend at a party stole from my house or something
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: But it was a rather fantastic, thick, thick volume.
[Guest]: It was an American scientific magazine from about 1920.
[Guest]: It was a bound volume of that year, 1920, of all the stuff from that year.
[Guest]: And the scientific invention, it was about like home science, basically, sort of like
[Guest]: the magazine was called Science and Invention.
[Guest]: Every issue, all 12 issues, a monthly magazine, I think, was about the fantastic things that
[Guest]: you can do with radio.
[Guest]: And radio was going to solve all the world's problems.
[Guest]: You know, the police were going to broadcast the names of criminals and people would catch
[Guest]: them.
[Guest]: There would be, you know, you'd be radioing, everything was going to be resolved by radio.
[Guest]: So everyone would have a radio in their car.
[Guest]: You could call your car with your radio, etc, etc.
[Guest]: There would be a radio station in every home.
[Guest]: And it's funny because I had that book around the time when the internet was exploding,
[Guest]: and it was exactly the same thing.
[Guest]: This internet would solve everything, you know.
[Guest]: And what's interesting is that when radio first came in, in the 1920s, people did have
[Guest]: radio stations.
[Guest]: You know, and I discovered when I was writing my book about Cairo, that Cairo in like 1927,
[Guest]: I don't remember the exact date, had like 500 radio stations, 500, you know.
[Guest]: A lot of them were some little guy in an apartment because you could buy all this equipment and
[Guest]: make your own radio station.
[Guest]: There was no regulation of the airwaves, etc, etc, etc.
[Guest]: And eventually what happened was it got more and more and more and more regulated until
[Guest]: Egypt had a, you know, state radio monopoly.
[Guest]: And Britain had the BBC, and America had three networks, you know, amalgamated.
[Guest]: It used to be literally tens of thousands of radio stations in America.
[Guest]: So there's always this kind of exuberance and explosion at the beginning of something
[Guest]: that then eventually gets amalgamated.
[Guest]: And that exuberance and explosion comes with dangers and trouble, you know.
[Guest]: And we're in a moment like that right now, I think.
[Guest]: And you know, there's sort of pluses and minuses to everything.
[Guest]: There's a plus and minus to the exuberance and having many, many different sources of
[Guest]: information.
[Guest]: But as we can see, as you say, the fragmentation now means that you're not quite sure if you're
[Guest]: dealing with the same cultural baggage as other people, which can be, you know, it can
[Guest]: be difficult having a lack of commonality.
[Guest]: So I don't know if there's a resolution to this, but I mean, your observation is absolutely
[Guest]: right.
[Amit Varma]: I think what often happens is that where a lot of communication fails between people,
[Amit Varma]: it's because of the curse of knowledge, that I might be talking to someone and I might
[Amit Varma]: assume that things that I take for granted are things that the other person knows.
[Amit Varma]: And that might not be the case, especially since, you know, in what you mentioned about
[Amit Varma]: Cairo that, you know, it's an old city with young people.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, in India, for example, I think more than 60% of the people by now are born
[Amit Varma]: after liberalization.
[Amit Varma]: So I can get into an argument with the understanding that of course, we know why licenses are bad
[Amit Varma]: and price controls are bad, and all of that shit is bad, because, you know, I have that
[Amit Varma]: lived experience.
[Amit Varma]: And it's an assumption I have.
[Amit Varma]: But then I realized that, wait a minute, you cannot take it for granted that the other
[Amit Varma]: person shares this understanding, right?
[Amit Varma]: So you have to kind of make an effort to go that extra mile, like often on my podcast
[Amit Varma]: during a conversation with someone, you know, there might be a stretch of conversation,
[Amit Varma]: which I later think that, huh, we were kind of stating the obvious.
[Amit Varma]: And then suddenly 20 people on Twitter will come up and say, my God, that's a TIL, you
[Amit Varma]: know, today I learned moment I didn't kind of know that, by the way, those predictions
[Amit Varma]: about radio have in a sense come true today, because now, you know, all the things that
[Amit Varma]: they said you can do with radio, you can, I mean, in a sense, this is, you know, this
[Amit Varma]: is a radio station.
[Amit Varma]: So welcome to the seen and the unseen radio station is radio on demand five hours a week.
[Amit Varma]: So for all of you who say five hours is too much, no, it's not, it's too little, it's
[Amit Varma]: five hours a week, you know, that's hardly a radio station.
[Amit Varma]: But here we sort of so sort of a digression from the digression, and it's perhaps a mischievous
[Amit Varma]: personal question, but to go back to the question that my friend asked in that email thread
[Amit Varma]: I told you about that, you know, what are you into, that no one you know, is actually
[Amit Varma]: into, you know, which could be a secret interest or a passion or just something that is kind
[Amit Varma]: of off the beaten track, what would you say would your interest be?
[Guest]: Gosh, that's a tough one, actually, I don't know, I have rather kinky, not kinky, but
[Guest]: I have very diverse reading habits.
[Guest]: I just like to, I like to pluck things out that I know nothing about, and just plunge
[Guest]: in, you know, so I'm not, I'm, you know, there's this sort of the hedgehog and the fox different
[Guest]: types of personality, I'm a totally foxy person, I, you know, so I often go down sort of funny
[Guest]: rabbit holes of knowledge and information that, so I just like to be as diverse as possible,
[Guest]: so I'm constantly getting distracted, actually.
[Guest]: So it's hard to say that there's some particular, I don't have some little, you know, interest
[Guest]: in, you know, 17th century porcelain or something like that, that I hide from the world, you
[Guest]: know, but instead I just have lots of little interests and, you know, constant curiosity
[Guest]: about other places and other things.
[Guest]: Yeah, but in terms of sort of habits and hobbies, gosh, I'm very boring, actually.
[Guest]: I don't particularly play any wild sport, I don't do any great, you know, works of art,
[Guest]: I don't play music particularly, I don't even listen to a huge amount of music, but I listen
[Guest]: to extremely diverse stuff, I mean, very eclectic from sort of Uyghur chanting to, you know,
[Guest]: Beethoven to whatever, you know.
[Guest]: So I think I may have to disappoint you slightly on that, I haven't, I'm not coming up with
[Guest]: some funny little thing, no, no, no, no, no, otherwise quite ordinary tastes.
[Amit Varma]: No worries.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, describing your reading taste, you've already given me this great new category
[Amit Varma]: we could put in bookshops called kinky not kinky, which is how you described your sort
[Unknown]: of stuff, it's kinky not kinky.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, I think that could be sort of a popular category and so I'm taken back to an old memory,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you were talking about how we just, you know, there was a consensus on the truth,
[Amit Varma]: you had three channels and this and that.
[Amit Varma]: And in India, of course, we had Doordarshan.
[Amit Varma]: And every week Doordarshan would show one sort of art film, quote unquote, right?
[Amit Varma]: And they'd show it once a week.
[Amit Varma]: So there is this legend about how, you know, Pradeep Kishan's film, which Arundhati Roy
[Amit Varma]: wrote and acted in, in which Annie gives it those ones, that showed only once on Doordarshan,
[Amit Varma]: right?
[Amit Varma]: So you would think, hey, everybody missed it, it showed only once on Doordarshan.
[Amit Varma]: But everybody I know saw it, because it came only once on Doordarshan, right?
[Amit Varma]: And I, my dad was a bureaucrat, and he was for a while the director of the Film Institute
[Amit Varma]: in Pune in the late 80s.
[Amit Varma]: And he once gave a speech at one point, which I disagreed with vehemently, and which I now
[Amit Varma]: disagree with mildly, not so vehemently.
[Amit Varma]: And his point of the speech was, and this was after liberalization and all the liberalization
[Amit Varma]: and all the channels came.
[Amit Varma]: And his point was that no, you know, fine, you have all this choice, but you're aimlessly
[Amit Varma]: surfing back in the Doordarshan days, you knew what to watch, you knew something would
[Amit Varma]: come and you knew you would watch it.
[Amit Varma]: And now you're just surfing aimlessly.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, I disagree with him, because more choice is always a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: And having so much available has totally shaped me.
[Amit Varma]: But when I spend five, six hours just mindlessly clicking on links and all that, I kind of
[Amit Varma]: get where that is coming from, you know, how much more would I have read if I didn't have
[Amit Varma]: all the books of the world available to me.
[Amit Varma]: So let's kind of go back to sort of your journey.
[Amit Varma]: What was boarding school like in the US?
[Guest]: It was very, it was rather idyllic.
[Guest]: I went to the particular boarding school I went to, I got a scholarship, which was nice.
[Guest]: It was in the countryside.
[Guest]: So it's a rather beautiful place.
[Guest]: And it was kind of strange to be thrown into a place with people entirely your own generation.
[Guest]: It was also co-ed, which was also quite nice.
[Guest]: So it wasn't some sort of, you know, little, you know, boys running around little uniforms.
[Guest]: We were just in normal clothes, and it was in the countryside, and it was rather liberal
[Guest]: and kind of fun, actually.
[Guest]: Yeah, I was there for three years, and I hadn't lived in America for a long time.
[Guest]: So it was a sort of a re-insertion into America.
[Guest]: But it was actually rather nice because it was also full of other people of my age, in
[Guest]: the same generation, who were also slightly uprooted, you know, in one way or another.
[Guest]: A lot of people came from slightly broken families, for example, divorced parents or
[Guest]: something like that, or their parents worked someplace and they needed to go to school
[Guest]: somewhere else.
[Guest]: And there are quite a lot of international people there as well.
[Guest]: So the mix of kids was very nice.
[Guest]: So I was there for three years, from like 14 to 17, something like that, years old.
[Unknown]: And it was rather idyllic.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah, we had a very good time.
[Guest]: I mean, we spent a lot of time outdoors.
[Guest]: You could actually go skiing right there, cross-country skiing in these rather beautiful
[Guest]: mountains in the winter.
[Guest]: So I remember the colour of the snow in the late afternoon, which turns kind of purpley,
[Guest]: browny, yellow.
[Guest]: It was rather stunning.
[Guest]: And yeah, I had my first exposure to drugs, sex, all that stuff.
[Guest]: Lots of music, you know, all the other kids were very big on music.
[Guest]: And I had been having grown up in a place like Egypt, I was kind of like a barbarian,
[Guest]: you know, these kind of provincial tastes, although we weren't that provincial, but suddenly
[Guest]: thrown into this.
[Guest]: It was an interesting time for music, I mean, like the early 70s, I guess, in the US.
[Guest]: So there was a kind of education in all of that, you know, things like Pink Floyd and,
[Guest]: you know, David Bowie and so on, Rolling Stones were all kind of huge.
[Guest]: And I sort of got to know about jazz, I'd never listened to that before.
[Guest]: And we also used to escape from boarding school.
[Guest]: For several years, I was a big hitchhiker.
[Guest]: I used to hitchhike all over the place, which sounds insane, and, you know, it's probably
[Guest]: quite dangerous.
[Guest]: Luckily, nothing ever happened to me.
[Guest]: But I used to hitchhike to New York, which was quite a long way away.
[Guest]: So I hitchhiked several times, you know, all the way to New York City.
[Guest]: And I had a couple of friends who had apartments there, we'd hang out in New York City.
[Guest]: So I fell in love with New York for the first time.
[Guest]: And yeah, it was full of adventure.
[Guest]: I had a lot of fun.
[Guest]: And with another group of friends, I think I was 16, we drove all the way to Florida
[Guest]: during a holiday.
[Guest]: Someone's borrowed old Chevrolet, which actually had a hole in the floor, you could see the
[Guest]: highway underneath.
[Guest]: And yeah, we drove all the way to Miami and back, which was, you know, wildly adventurous.
[Amit Varma]: And are you in touch with any of those friends?
[Amit Varma]: Some of them.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: Some of them.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I mean, you know how it is.
[Guest]: It's a good question because, you know, having moved so often, I'm not very in touch with,
[Guest]: you know, like a cohort of like high school friends or something like that.
[Guest]: Not at all.
[Guest]: I mean, just it's a very, in very small numbers, yeah.
[Guest]: Which is kind of a shame.
[Guest]: Because that's the thing, that's the sort of thing that one loses by having a very peripatetic
[Guest]: upbringing is having that sort of, when you ask about home, for a lot of people home means
[Guest]: your friends, you know, and if your friends are all over the place, that's a small problem.
[Guest]: So I do regret not having a, you know, sort of long standing group of really old friends.
[Guest]: And when I meet, you know, friends, other friends of mine who do have that, I'm often
[Guest]: just, you know, respectful and a bit envious of having, you know, a body of friends that
[Amit Varma]: you've stuck with for your whole life.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, where this thought came from was I was just chatting yesterday with a friend
[Amit Varma]: about how, you know, no one from school is my friend still today, in the sense, I'm not
[Amit Varma]: even in touch with them.
[Amit Varma]: A couple of them in Facebook, you see a name, you say, okay, you know, you take a friend
[Amit Varma]: request, but you're not really friends.
[Amit Varma]: And it's ditto with college with a couple of exceptions.
[Amit Varma]: And what I was speculating about as a possible reason for that, is that back in that day,
[Amit Varma]: we are restrained by geography and circumstance.
[Amit Varma]: So you have a very small sample size of people to choose from for people to be friends.
[Amit Varma]: And if your interests are not quite mainstream, or whatever, then you're unlikely to find
[Amit Varma]: people quite like yourself.
[Amit Varma]: And the internet changed all that.
[Amit Varma]: So many of my closest friends are really people I met through the internet once a blogging
[Amit Varma]: age kind of started, which is well into adulthood for me, right.
[Amit Varma]: And before that, not only was I a very different person, but I don't really have friends from
[Amit Varma]: so I don't know how many of my listeners would sort of share this, I guess, for younger people
[Amit Varma]: is kind of easier.
[Amit Varma]: Because if you're going to school and college, when Facebook and all are already there, then
[Amit Varma]: by default, you're just a part of those communities.
[Amit Varma]: And by default, you know, the world is already opened up for you, in a sense, which is which
[Amit Varma]: is where that kind of question came from, because I was wondering, because initially,
[Amit Varma]: you're thrust into communities of circumstance, like perhaps in your elite bubble in Cairo
[Amit Varma]: or in your boarding school or whatever, but eventually, you begin to form communities
[Amit Varma]: of choice.
[Guest]: Well, maybe maybe this is one of the upsides to what you were talking about before, which
[Guest]: is the fragmentation of the world, you know, that, you know, it used to be that we couldn't
[Guest]: choose our friends very much, just like you can't choose your own family, a lot of people
[Guest]: are, you know, are sentenced to be with their family forever, which is often not nice, you
[Guest]: know, I mean, they may not get along, you know, but you're sentenced to it.
[Guest]: But we, you know, many people were sentenced to the friends that they've always known forever,
[Guest]: and which there's an advantage to it in the same way, there's an advantage to everyone
[Guest]: listening to Doordarshan, you know, and knowing what we're sharing the same movies, etc, etc.
[Guest]: But so maybe the fact that we now choose friends more carefully or not more carefully, but
[Guest]: you're likely to get a finer tuned kind of friendship, because you share a lot in advance
[Guest]: through social media, for example, you know, it's interesting and new, maybe to some extent,
[Guest]: and maybe that's that is the upside to fragmentation is a more sophisticated or different kind
[Guest]: of friendship.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So, tell me about going back to Cairo, because you mentioned that after you came back from
[Amit Varma]: boarding school, your relationship with Cairo changed in the sense that you kind of, you
[Amit Varma]: know, dived in a little deeper earlier, you were in your expat bubble.
[Amit Varma]: And now you're sort of, you know, making new friends in the city more.
[Amit Varma]: What was this like?
[Guest]: What was this process like?
[Guest]: Well, that was when I, you know, I completely fell in love with Cairo, I like and had a,
[Guest]: you know, sort of, I just think of myself as being a really voracious creature in every
[Guest]: way.
[Guest]: I just wanted to know everything about everything.
[Guest]: So, I had a rather weird career, actually, I went to university in Cairo, and but it
[Guest]: took me seven years to get an undergraduate degree, because I was actually working at
[Guest]: the same time.
[Guest]: So, I worked as a journalist, I worked as a tour guide, I worked making maps, I did
[Guest]: various other funny odd jobs, and didn't actually do that much studying.
[Guest]: And I had my own apartment most of the time, or a shared apartment, stuff like that.
[Guest]: And I was just a huge experiment.
[Guest]: And I, you know, Egypt is rather like India, I mean, the divisions between classes are
[Guest]: very strong.
[Guest]: And so you tend to, you know, hang out with other middle class people of exactly your
[Guest]: same stripe.
[Guest]: You know, there isn't a caste system in Egypt, but it's, you know, basically, if you belong
[Guest]: to the middle class, car driving, you know, slightly attuned to the Western world, you
[Guest]: don't mix with people who are, you know, driving taxis and, you know, working class people.
[Guest]: So as an outsider coming in, I had this kind of privilege of being able to roam around,
[Guest]: and also privilege, but also the lack of, you know, barriers, you know, particularly.
[Guest]: So I was kind of able to do some social voyeurism of a kind that wouldn't necessarily be allowed
[Guest]: to an Egyptian, and that was probably in some ways unwise, or I don't know, you know.
[Guest]: But so I hung out a lot with very sort of, you know, traditional working class people,
[Guest]: and got to understand them, and made some very good friends.
[Guest]: And I also experimented a lot with drugs.
[Guest]: I did a lot of hashish, which in Egypt at the time, everybody did hashish.
[Guest]: It was just all over the place all the time, you know, completely normal sort of thing.
[Guest]: And also, as I began to work as a journalist to a certain extent, and got involved in sort
[Guest]: of politics and how it works, and, you know, having friends from all walks of life, I got
[Guest]: interested in crime stories, and business stuff, and how money is made.
[Guest]: And I did quite a lot of traveling as well, all over the Middle East.
[Guest]: And yeah, I experimented with very odd, different living circumstances.
[Guest]: I went through a lot of different relationships.
[Guest]: You know, I lived in an apartment with this rather sort of seven-foot-tall guy from Detroit,
[Guest]: a black American guy who was really quite amazing.
[Guest]: He was a singer, gay singer, who just kind of adopted Cairo, and was hanging out and
[Guest]: living this very bohemian life.
[Guest]: I was actually pretty bohemian too.
[Guest]: Yeah, that was a sort of wild period when a lot of the kind of personal experience that
[Guest]: ended up going into the Cairo book happened then, but I lived for like 10 years, a little
[Guest]: bit on the edge, and just had a lot of fun, basically.
[Guest]: And that was one of the things that Cairo was rather wonderful at the time, that you
[Guest]: could do that and actually make a living.
[Guest]: I wasn't ambitious.
[Guest]: I wasn't trying to go anywhere.
[Guest]: I was just trying to soak up stuff, information, experience.
[Guest]: And I had this sort of 10-year-long period of sowing wild oats and doing slightly mad
[Amit Varma]: things, but having a wonderful time.
[Amit Varma]: And how did the journalism come about?
[Amit Varma]: Had you decided always that you want to be a journalist, or had you decided that, hey,
[Amit Varma]: I want to write and this is one good way of writing, or how did that happen and how were
[Guest]: you thinking of it?
[Guest]: Well, there's a great deal of oozing that happened.
[Guest]: There were very few decisions were ever made about anything.
[Guest]: I mean, there's just like, these are the things that I could do and make some money from.
[Guest]: So I could write an article and make a little bit of money, and then write another article
[Guest]: and make a little bit more money.
[Guest]: And one thing followed another.
[Guest]: And the thing is that after 10 years of living in Cairo, my Arabic was excellent.
[Guest]: I really understood the place extremely well.
[Guest]: And I was already doing things like writing for guidebooks and travel magazines and things
[Unknown]: like that.
[Guest]: And I got a job because I needed one steady job to sort of just pay the rent.
[Guest]: And so I got a job as the kind of assistant person for an American newspaper, the Los
[Guest]: Angeles Times.
[Guest]: And it was like a morning job.
[Guest]: It was a half-day job, but it was kind of useful because it paid the rent, but it gave
[Guest]: me a schedule for the first time in my life.
[Guest]: I actually had to be somewhere.
[Guest]: And I had to translate the newspapers every day and sort of help the bureau out with everything
[Guest]: to do, everything in Arabic, what's happening in the region in terms of news.
[Guest]: So I kind of had to be more systematic.
[Guest]: And when I was doing that for a bit, I got offered some proper pukka news stuff.
[Guest]: I did some work for the Financial Times.
[Guest]: I actually became the – there was someone who had been writing for The Economist from
[Guest]: Egypt.
[Guest]: And when she left, she said, why don't you take up my string?
[Guest]: And so I started – my first article for The Economist was, I think, 1987 or something
[Guest]: like that.
[Unknown]: It was a really long time ago.
[Guest]: 88, I think.
[Guest]: And then these things, it just turned into more.
[Guest]: So I suddenly found myself working – and I finally got my university degree.
[Guest]: They got rid of me and sort of get out of here and take this degree and don't be a student
[Guest]: anymore.
[Guest]: By that time, I was already working as a stringer, basically, for different newspapers.
[Guest]: And it just took on a life of its own.
[Guest]: And I found I had lots of work, and I was traveling a bit around the region.
[Guest]: And I woke up one morning to find myself a full-time journalist without ever having decided
[Guest]: to do this job.
[Guest]: And I enjoyed it, actually.
[Guest]: It was great.
[Guest]: I was just looking through some files I have, and I've got frightening stacks of articles.
[Guest]: I mean, it's hard to even imagine that I actually wrote so much junk.
[Guest]: And of course, at the time, I would actually file stories first by telex and then by fax,
[Guest]: and stuff written on a typewriter.
[Guest]: I had a big stand-up typewriter, so there was a lot of clackety noise.
[Guest]: And then I think I had my first laptop, which was wildly ahead of its time.
[Guest]: I had a Toshiba laptop that weighed sort of like 20 pounds or something in 1991 or something,
[Guest]: which was quite fancy stuff at the time.
[Guest]: So yeah, the technology changed.
[Guest]: It became easier to do a lot of that stuff.
[Guest]: And still no internet, of course.
[Guest]: I mean, no real internet, that I didn't come into later.
[Guest]: But yeah, so I just oozed in and found myself doing quite nicely as a freelance journalist.
[Amit Varma]: A couple of questions.
[Amit Varma]: You know, whenever I sort of teach my – I remember I was teaching my writing course
[Amit Varma]: recently.
[Amit Varma]: I teach a course on writing every month, it's an online course.
[Amit Varma]: And somebody asked me about how I learned the stuff that I am teaching.
[Amit Varma]: And I had to regretfully inform them that it was a process that took many, many years
[Amit Varma]: and no one taught me and I had to learn it by doing.
[Amit Varma]: And like, my God, had I done this course when I was 24, I think my life would have been
[Amit Varma]: different in the sense that when I look back on the stuff I wrote then, it's like cringeworthy.
[Amit Varma]: I want to deny I ever wrote that.
[Amit Varma]: And thankfully, that's pre-internet and none of it is out there and people can't take screenshots
[Amit Varma]: and say, okay, look for adverbs in a sentence and what are you even doing and all of that
[Amit Varma]: crap.
[Amit Varma]: So, a couple of questions and the first of them is this that, how did you – like one,
[Amit Varma]: what do you feel when you look at your own writing?
[Amit Varma]: And how did you then kind of pick up the values of A, writing and B, journalism and the kind
[Amit Varma]: of different things, you know, so, in the sense that if you're writing for multiple
[Amit Varma]: people, you're getting different kinds of inputs, I'm guessing that the expectations
[Amit Varma]: on you as a stringer are also different from what they would be from, say, maybe a staffer
[Amit Varma]: at some point in time.
[Amit Varma]: And they gradually start going up as, you know, you get more and more writing and more
[Amit Varma]: and more responsibility.
[Amit Varma]: So, how did you sort of learn to write?
[Amit Varma]: What were your early tendencies like?
[Amit Varma]: How did you pick up the values that you picked up about first writing and then about journalism
[Amit Varma]: also per se?
[Guest]: I'm not quite sure how to answer.
[Guest]: To start with, I should say one thing, which is that I had the luck of being in a place
[Guest]: where quite exciting things were happening all the time.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, I was there for the first Gulf War, the second Gulf War, the first Intifada,
[Guest]: the second Intifada, the end of the Lebanese Civil War, the beginning of this, you know.
[Guest]: And so, all that Middle East, you know, turmoil meant that there was constant stuff happening.
[Guest]: So, there was never any lack of dramatic, you know, material to get one going and get
[Guest]: your curiosity going and also to have a market in which to sell whatever I was producing.
[Guest]: And I'm not sure that there were any special models.
[Guest]: I mean, as I say, you know, I really grew up as a huge consumer of the news.
[Guest]: You know, I was always reading stuff, always.
[Guest]: I mean, we used to get the Guardian Weekly.
[Guest]: There was this wonderful airmail edition on this fantastic, thin, crisp paper that weighed
[Guest]: absolutely nothing, very white.
[Guest]: I don't know if you remember this.
[Guest]: It's very nice.
[Guest]: So, it would come once a week, rather late usually, but it was the Guardian, Washington
[Guest]: Post, and Le Monde, all in one weekly package.
[Guest]: So, there's a lot of always really good stuff in there.
[Guest]: I'd read The Economist when I could.
[Guest]: We also had things like, you know, the Herald Tribune no longer exists, a very global international
[Guest]: newspaper.
[Guest]: So, there were a lot of models for, you know, how to…I was always very conscious of trying
[Guest]: to explain the world to other worldly people.
[Guest]: You know, because I grew up somewhere else, I was never trying to explain the world to,
[Guest]: you know, Americans or to, you know, some particular nationality or, you know, what
[Guest]: does India need to know from this particular thing that's happening?
[Guest]: I always thought of my audience as a very general reader.
[Guest]: And also partly because I've been living in a different culture almost all my life,
[Guest]: I'm quite aware of the things that other people don't know and need to know to understand
[Guest]: something, which is often quite important, you know, to actually give the context about
[Guest]: something, to actually give the background, you know, to make sure that you carry your
[Guest]: reader with you and don't go out on a tangent where they don't understand what you're talking
[Guest]: about.
[Guest]: So, it's important to have that kind of in the back of your mind.
[Guest]: And I think that was always part of my, you know, sort of Bildung, you know, to use a
[Guest]: fancy German word, you know, is the need to make sense to people who are not necessarily
[Guest]: speaking the same language or having had the same experience as you.
[Guest]: So that's always been important.
[Guest]: But in terms of, you know, actual models, I think, you know, you just get a sense for
[Guest]: good writing.
[Guest]: And it's like you say, I mean, one just has to do a lot of it.
[Guest]: I mean, there's the famous 10,000 rule, you know, where you just have to do something
[Guest]: 10,000 times, and you just get better at it.
[Guest]: And you know, it's inevitable, I mean, some people are always bad and will remain bad.
[Guest]: They will remain nameless, you know, they just never get good at it because they're
[Guest]: just not good at it.
[Guest]: But, you know, sort of practice definitely makes perfect.
[Guest]: I think there's also practice, but there's also form that's very important.
[Guest]: So, you know, something that's improved my writing a lot with, you know, writing for
[Guest]: something like The Economist, for example, or other things that I've had to write for.
[Guest]: And that's one reason that journalism as a discipline can be quite useful, is that you
[Guest]: have to write to length and time, you know, I mean, you have to deliver in a certain limited
[Guest]: amount of time.
[Guest]: So you've got to get the damn thing done, and you've got to get it out, and it has to
[Guest]: make sense.
[Guest]: It's got to be clear.
[Guest]: It's got to be compelling.
[Guest]: And it's got to be true, you know, because if it's not true, then, you know, not good.
[Guest]: But you also often have to write within a format.
[Guest]: So you'll have 800 words, or 650 words, or 1,222 words.
[Guest]: And this is very, very important because, you know, when you get more skilled at that,
[Guest]: that shapes the whole story.
[Guest]: You get to know what you can fit into that space.
[Guest]: But you also, the discipline of concision is quite important.
[Guest]: It doesn't mean everything has to be written in abbreviations or in a great, you know,
[Guest]: kind of gush of, you know, cramming all the information you can.
[Guest]: But you just know that you've got to make sure that you cut things down so that you
[Guest]: stick to what's important and keep it clear.
[Guest]: And that's also, it's practice, but there's also the discipline of form is really quite
[Guest]: important too.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, one point I keep making in my course as well is that clear writing and
[Amit Varma]: clear thinking have a two-way relationship.
[Amit Varma]: So obviously for a clear thinker, you're more likely to be a clear writer, but it works
[Amit Varma]: the other way.
[Amit Varma]: If you force yourself to write clearly, you will force, have to think clearly because
[Amit Varma]: you cannot hide behind vague abstractions or, you know, the jargon and so on and so
[Amit Varma]: forth.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're just now thinking aloud from what you say, a constraint also helps because
[Amit Varma]: if you have that constraint that I have 800 words and no more, then you're forced to figure
[Amit Varma]: out what is essential about the subject that you're writing about.
[Amit Varma]: And just that process, I would guess kind of clarifies your thinking on it.
[Amit Varma]: My next question also comes from something that you mentioned that when you're writing,
[Amit Varma]: because you're an outsider, you realize that there are things that I cannot take for granted
[Amit Varma]: the reader knows.
[Amit Varma]: So I have to explain it to them.
[Amit Varma]: Now I had this phase maybe 15, 16 years ago for a couple of years where I was writing
[Amit Varma]: on cricket for the Guardian and the Observer and I was doing op-eds for the Wall Street
[Amit Varma]: Journal and I got tired of that really soon and I didn't want to do that anymore.
[Amit Varma]: And the main reason for that is exactly this, but in the negative sense for a writer, which
[Amit Varma]: is that I felt that I have to dumb it down too much to explain really basic things to
[Amit Varma]: my reader, which therefore, you know, given the constraint of space, reduces how much
[Amit Varma]: I can actually say and how deep I can go.
[Amit Varma]: And how many things you know, I can assume that the reader knows like, when I read someone
[Amit Varma]: like my favorite essayist in India, Pratap Bhanumetha, for example, right now, Pratap,
[Amit Varma]: I think, packs in more insight into each sentence than any other writer in this country does.
[Amit Varma]: But it also assumes a certain background level of knowledge or understanding on the part
[Amit Varma]: of the reader.
[Amit Varma]: And that works wonderfully well for readers like me, but it may not speak to everybody.
[Amit Varma]: So in that sense, he's kind of a writer's writer.
[Amit Varma]: Now how much is, so there is a trade off here.
[Amit Varma]: And one is that if you are writing the first draft of history, if you're writing about
[Amit Varma]: something that is happening in a particular society and you want that first draft of history
[Amit Varma]: to speak clearly to as many people as possible, then you know, you can keep it wide and not
[Amit Varma]: worry about going too deep.
[Amit Varma]: But if you want to yourself kind of go deeper and deeper and make certain specific points,
[Amit Varma]: you know, then that kind of comes in the way.
[Amit Varma]: So how do you sort of deal with this kind of, you know, having to maintain this kind
[Amit Varma]: of balance?
[Guest]: Well, one is generally very aware of the audience you're writing for.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, so there are certain kinds of things in the right time and place.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, when I look at an article by Pratap Bhanumeta, I'm expecting Olympian,
[Guest]: you know, wisdom and, you know, and enjoying Olympian wisdom because he's fantastic and
[Guest]: he really is a wonderful, wonderful writer.
[Guest]: And he's expecting to deliver that too.
[Guest]: So it depends on that.
[Guest]: And, you know, when one does different things for different audiences.
[Guest]: So, you know, even within the confines of The Economist, for example, you know, we have
[Guest]: lots of different frames for different kinds of things.
[Guest]: So I write opinion articles for The Economist and sometimes news articles, sometimes analysis
[Guest]: articles, sometimes, you know, and it can be frustrating sometimes exactly as you say,
[Guest]: because you feel like you don't have the space to say what you want to say, or that because
[Guest]: it's so short, you end up repeating the same thing again and again, which is dreary, and
[Guest]: you'd really rather write it once and get it over with and, you know, do it at length.
[Guest]: And, you know, that's all very true.
[Guest]: So having a variety of outlets is a very useful thing.
[Guest]: You know, at different phases in my career, I, you know, one of the things I used to write
[Guest]: quite often for the New York Review of Books, I don't write for them that much anymore,
[Guest]: because I just, I found myself too busy.
[Guest]: But I found that it was a good balance that I could do my sort of, you know, slightly
[Guest]: more pretentious, heavy intellectual stuff for a greater length and depth for the New
[Guest]: York Review of Books, and then just make a living doing my actual journalism day-to-day
[Guest]: thing.
[Guest]: So, but, you know, one also tries to, even in mundane stuff, you know, stick in a note
[Guest]: of something more interesting if you can, if one has a profound insight, or you think
[Guest]: you do, or you get a quote from someone that's really, you know, seems to be really enlightening.
[Guest]: One can stick it into a very otherwise dumb story, you know?
[Guest]: So one doesn't want to draw these lines too, you know, these barriers too strongly.
[Guest]: But I think, you know, ideally, it's nice to have different outlets for different kinds
[Guest]: of moods and, you know, purposes.
[Guest]: So that's one of the things that keeps me going.
[Guest]: If I were just doing the same, you know, race course announcement, you know, day after day
[Guest]: after day, I would get very tired.
[Guest]: But also, you know, occasionally, it's nice to write, you know, something completely different,
[Guest]: like a slightly racy thriller, just to break the rhythm entirely and try something, you
[Amit Varma]: know, absolutely different.
[Amit Varma]: I can't wait to read your racy thriller, actually, you have sent it to me.
[Amit Varma]: Hopefully I can persuade you to read out a passage from after the break when the reader
[Amit Varma]: has context, but still a while to go before that.
[Amit Varma]: So here's my next question, which is a standard one that, you know, which is exasperating
[Amit Varma]: for a non journalist when you're looking from the outside.
[Amit Varma]: And but when you are a journalist, you simply don't know how to get around it, which is
[Amit Varma]: a tension between being a generalist and a specialist, right?
[Amit Varma]: Like one of the laments I have of sort of what is happening in Indian journalism today
[Amit Varma]: is that because budgets are getting cut, too many journalists are forced to become generalists.
[Amit Varma]: So earlier, you'd have a particular person say on a medicine beat who understands medicine
[Amit Varma]: or on expert, but here today, you just have generalists being thrown into the thick of
[Amit Varma]: things.
[Amit Varma]: They don't have time to work on stories.
[Amit Varma]: It's like they're doing one story, two stories a day.
[Amit Varma]: So everything is very surface.
[Amit Varma]: And for a journalist, especially that's really something you can't beat, because you'll never
[Amit Varma]: know any subject you're writing about, as well as a specialist in that.
[Amit Varma]: So to that specialist, you look like someone who's very naive and general, especially if
[Amit Varma]: you are writing in layman terms for an audience, which might know even less than you do, you
[Amit Varma]: know.
[Amit Varma]: And so how does one sort of get past that, because, you know, on the one hand, it's just,
[Amit Varma]: it's an occupational hazard.
[Amit Varma]: On the other hand, looking through your the excellent essays you've written in the New
[Amit Varma]: York Review of Books, like, you know, your recent essay on Arabic, for example, where
[Amit Varma]: you were reviewing a book on that, or earlier than that, when you know, you had this essay
[Amit Varma]: on Ayaan Hirsi Ali, and you know, how her view is simplistic in some ways, and, you
[Amit Varma]: know, you were kind of explaining Islam to her in a manner of speaking, and people might
[Amit Varma]: say, hey, who the hell are you to do that, you're Islam explaining, but it's a subject
[Amit Varma]: that you've lived with and covered and thought about deeply for decades.
[Guest]: And it shows.
[Amit Varma]: I have a degree in it, actually.
[Amit Varma]: You have a degree?
[Amit Varma]: So there you go.
[Amit Varma]: So in your case, it's clear that, you know, you're coming with that sort of expertise
[Amit Varma]: and it doesn't matter what your name is.
[Amit Varma]: But how does one sort of manage that kind of trade off?
[Amit Varma]: Like one complaint I've heard about journalism is what Michael Crichton named after his good
[Amit Varma]: friend Murray Gell-Mann, he called it Gell-Mann amnesia, right, you've heard of this, right?
[Amit Varma]: So Gell-Mann amnesia is when you read, let's say you're an expert in subject x.
[Amit Varma]: So you read The Economist on subject x, right?
[Amit Varma]: And a friend of mine made this exact complaint about The Economist.
[Amit Varma]: I do not agree with him.
[Amit Varma]: I think it's a great magazine or newspaper as it was originally called.
[Amit Varma]: But the thing, let's say you're an expert in subject x, and The Economist writes an
[Amit Varma]: article on subject x, and you're like, what bullshit, they know nothing about it, right?
[Amit Varma]: But everything else that The Economist writes on subjects you know nothing about, you take
[Amit Varma]: their word as gospel.
[Amit Varma]: So this is like Gell-Mann amnesia, that you immediately forget that the one thing that
[Amit Varma]: you're an expert on, they knew nothing about.
[Amit Varma]: So why should you give them credibility on any other thing, right?
[Amit Varma]: And I think this is particularly unfair to ascribe this to The Economist.
[Amit Varma]: But it is certainly true for a lot of the journalism that I see otherwise around me.
[Amit Varma]: And this, again, is something that would arise from the generalist versus specialist kind
[Amit Varma]: of situation, especially because now the specialists have the means of production in their hands
[Amit Varma]: also.
[Amit Varma]: They've got blogs and newsletters, and so on happening out there.
[Amit Varma]: So if you are covering economics, and you write something really silly, I can go on
[Amit Varma]: Marginal Revolution and read a far better take, and I'm like, man, that journalist knows
[Amit Varma]: nothing.
[Amit Varma]: So how have you dealt with this sort of dilemma?
[Guest]: I think it's a very interesting dilemma.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, we're in a strange phase right now, because the world is full of instant
[Guest]: experts.
[Guest]: As you say, everyone is a generalist, but then suddenly, they're instantly an expert
[Guest]: on COVID, or instantly an expert on the Ukraine, or instantly, it's partly also TV has this
[Guest]: awful effect of casting up people who are just good at listening to the sound of their
[Guest]: own voice so much that they want to be instant experts on everything.
[Guest]: And absolutely, it's a hazard of journalism, and it's difficult in the economic circumstances
[Guest]: of a lot of the press.
[Guest]: They can't afford to have experts on everything, as perhaps they used to a little bit more
[Guest]: in the past.
[Guest]: And it is certainly a hazard.
[Guest]: I think, you know, it's a kind of strange that people often have expectations of the
[Guest]: press that are, I think, slightly unreasonable, you know, that you should expect the press
[Guest]: to be what the press is, you know, it is trying to deliver a fast impression of things that
[Guest]: are important.
[Guest]: It may not be the best picture, the most accurate, the most perfect, the most anything, but it's
[Guest]: an attempt, it's an effort to get this across with various degrees of seriousness, sometimes
[Guest]: not serious at all, and sometimes downright, you know, frivolous or misleading, actually.
[Guest]: But you know, I think, you know, this is something that does distinguish a better journalist
[Guest]: from a worse journalist, you know, aside from, you know, clever writing style, blah, blah,
[Guest]: blah, blah, is really doing your job in terms of finding the information.
[Guest]: I mean, making sure that you know enough of what you're writing about to, not to be an
[Guest]: expert necessarily, but to, you know, to grasp it to the extent where you understand the
[Guest]: parameters of the thing that you're talking about.
[Guest]: You have some idea of its background, its past, you know, of the factors that contributed
[Guest]: to it, etc, etc, etc.
[Guest]: I mean, often that's just all it takes is to just read the Wikipedia article about something.
[Guest]: And unfortunately, quite a lot of journalists don't even bother to do that sort of thing.
[Guest]: They just, you know, plunge in and want to make a good story, and the result is often
[Guest]: a lot of bad journalism.
[Guest]: But I think I've always found it really important, and you know, there are limits to this though.
[Guest]: I mean, as you'll know, there's this kind of, you know, academics have the same problem
[Guest]: as a sort of research-itis, like you just have to research the hell out of something
[Guest]: to the point where it turns into noodles in your brain, and you are no longer capable
[Guest]: of writing about it.
[Guest]: This is what happens to a lot of people when they're doing their PhDs, for example.
[Guest]: That can happen in journalism too.
[Guest]: You think, I've got to have one more interview, I've got to understand one more thing.
[Guest]: And then as a result, the story suffers, and you've just got to get the damn thing out
[Guest]: actually, you know.
[Guest]: It's often the most important thing.
[Guest]: But there's got to be, you know, basically, as you're aware, and as I'm sure you tell
[Guest]: your students all the time, again and again, there's got to be a balance between these
[Guest]: things.
[Guest]: I mean, I think the thing is, you know, as a journalist, you're up against your own conscience.
[Guest]: I always just, I try really hard to understand what I'm talking about, and not be stupid
[Guest]: about subjects.
[Guest]: And occasionally, of course, one makes a, and of course, every time that you make a
[Guest]: mistake, it's called out.
[Guest]: But the sort of people who are constantly picking apart stories to say, you know, this
[Guest]: is, you know, as you say, the expert getting hold of some story in a mainstream newspaper
[Guest]: and picking it apart, can be very unfair.
[Guest]: You know, that said, I think, you know, there's always room for improvement, for a better
[Guest]: approach to things.
[Guest]: And I think, you know, some, for example, newspapers in India do a very good job of
[Guest]: kind of taking things apart, like, you know, having an explainer to explain things, or
[Guest]: having a longer article, you know, and this has happened more and more, that they don't
[Guest]: try to pretend that a news story is going to have all the information in it.
[Guest]: People find that somewhere else, you know, which is a perfectly good thing.
[Guest]: And as you say, I mean, now that we have access to everything, you can get the expert word
[Guest]: if you need it anyway.
[Guest]: So the purpose of mainstream news is more to give the broad picture and point you in
[Guest]: the right direction of where you might find something, you know, more profound.
[Guest]: So I think everyone has their role.
[Guest]: And one wishes the quality everywhere were a little bit better, and one wishes the ethics
[Amit Varma]: everywhere were a little bit better too.
[Amit Varma]: You know, what I look for in a journalist when they're writing about any subject is,
[Amit Varma]: is it a good faith effort, you know, beyond my real objection comes where it is obvious
[Amit Varma]: that either they have been a very lazy, or they've got a predetermined conclusion to
[Amit Varma]: whatever they are writing, and they're just kind of finding facts to fit that.
[Amit Varma]: But if you make a good faith effort, obviously, you're not going to get everything right.
[Amit Varma]: And that's kind of okay.
[Amit Varma]: And what you also said about, you know, the research it is and how you can kind of get,
[Amit Varma]: you know, it can become noodles in your head.
[Amit Varma]: And yeah, I mean, what I do tell my writing students about is the trade off between getting
[Amit Varma]: it done and getting it right.
[Amit Varma]: And I always say that, you know, the important thing is to get it done, I have a bias for
[Amit Varma]: getting it done, because the more you write, the better you become, you know, getting it
[Amit Varma]: done is a way to kind of getting it right.
[Amit Varma]: And my next question kind of comes from there.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm going to quote a little bit from the start of this New York Review of Books piece
[Amit Varma]: you wrote in Arabic, in fact, because I found this concept really nice, where you write
[Amit Varma]: at the end of a cart party, a QAT, is it pronounced cart?
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: At the end of a cart party, typically close to sunset, there comes a moment when the effervescence
[Amit Varma]: settles, conversations slackens, and thoughts turn quietly inward.
[Amit Varma]: This solomonic pause, Yemenis call it lehezit suleiman, serves as a cue.
[Amit Varma]: Guests rise from their cushions, hosts slip back to their own pursuits.
[Amit Varma]: It is a time to be alone.
[Amit Varma]: Cathinon, the stimulating compound in the fresh shoots and leaves of the cartbush at
[Amit Varma]: this stage induces a calm, crisp focus that drivers find useful for long trips and students
[Amit Varma]: from students for cramming, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And cathinon, by the way, sounds a lot like modafinil, which, you know, I use.
[Amit Varma]: And it has exactly that same effect, not a blunt tool like coffee, but much sharper.
[Amit Varma]: But I love this sort of this solomonic pause, as you call it, the lehezit suleiman, where,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you take a step back, and you relax, and there's no hurry anymore.
[Amit Varma]: And as a writer, it seems to me that, again, this is another trade off that, for example,
[Amit Varma]: for you, as a journalist, you spoke about the constraint of space and the constraint
[Amit Varma]: of time, you have your deadlines, you got to get the work done, you can't afford to
[Amit Varma]: kind of sit back and let it simmer and marinate and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But at another level, you are also doing another kind of engagement with whatever your subject
[Amit Varma]: is, especially, you know, all your years in the Middle East, all your years in India,
[Amit Varma]: where you're writing about the similar kind of society and a similar kind of politics
[Amit Varma]: for years, where you are taking that pause, and you're letting things simmer, and you're
[Amit Varma]: thinking about them a little deeper.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm guessing a lot of your first book, which we'll talk about also kind of comes
[Amit Varma]: from that kind of a process.
[Amit Varma]: So how has that sort of been for you?
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, do you therefore find that this is also important?
[Amit Varma]: Do you find yourself doing more of this?
[Amit Varma]: Do you wish that you did more of this than just writing to a deadline?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, obviously, that is useful as well, because you're working out your writing muscle,
[Amit Varma]: and it helps you to focus your thinking and, you know, get to what is essential.
[Amit Varma]: And that's an important part of it.
[Amit Varma]: But in general, when you look at yourself, like you've spoken about how what excited
[Amit Varma]: you about journalism was you're putting that first draft of history out there.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, you are seeing that first draft of history, and you're also doing
[Amit Varma]: in a sense, a more considered draft of whatever is going on after the first draft in various
[Amit Varma]: ways.
[Amit Varma]: Whether it's through, you know, today, you might write about something you've thought
[Amit Varma]: about for a couple of years, and it's coming out that way.
[Amit Varma]: Or you might feel I have to write a book about it.
[Amit Varma]: And as we were chatting before this, at lunch, you really should start a newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: But in general, what do you kind of think about the trade offs involved here and that
[Amit Varma]: these different modes of writing as it were?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think I know from for myself, I, you know, I've in my head, I've written about
[Guest]: 20 books.
[Guest]: And you know, lazy, basically, you know, if I were driven in a different way, or didn't
[Guest]: have some, you know, a kid to send to college, bills to pay, people to employ, stuff like
[Guest]: that, you know, and, you know, expensive habits to maintain, I would certainly have written
[Guest]: more stuff.
[Guest]: And, you know, some of the ideas that I've had for books that would have been great,
[Guest]: I've seen them come out come to fruition, there's something very strange, there's unquestionably
[Guest]: a sort of, you know, zeitgeist out there that where people have the same idea at the same
[Guest]: time, because I have several books that I've thought of thinking, wow, that'll make a big
[Guest]: publishing success.
[Guest]: Bam, next year, there are three of them, you know, they just come out.
[Guest]: So one word of advice to your students is just don't be lazy, just go ahead and do it.
[Guest]: You know, I mean, which I regret not having done.
[Guest]: But aside from those regrets, often the more insightful bits, passages, you know, ideas
[Guest]: that I've had for stuff that I've written, have been done, as you're suggesting, not
[Guest]: at the typewriter, at the, you know, interface, you know, on the coalface, you know, with
[Guest]: your screen in front of you, it's actually lying down, you know, taking a nap and waking
[Unknown]: up and suddenly thinking, ooh.
[Guest]: Or like when I was doing my writing of the thriller that I wrote during lockdown, I would
[Guest]: actually just wake up in the middle of the night and think, ah, you know, and get up
[Guest]: and then scribble that passage, you know.
[Guest]: So there's a kind of repose and, you know, kind of gestation period is really important
[Guest]: for good writing too.
[Guest]: It can't be too, too, too forced.
[Guest]: You know, of course, just like, you know, we were saying over-research is bad, but over-gestation
[Guest]: is also bad.
[Guest]: I mean, it's not like you have to, you know, sit there and wait for inspiration, which
[Guest]: seems to be what a lot of people do, and that waiting for inspiration goes on for months
[Guest]: and years and lifetimes.
[Guest]: That's obviously not on either.
[Guest]: But I think moments of repose and reflection and quietly sort of just talking to yourself,
[Guest]: you know, rolling things around in your head quietly away from a screen and away from a
[Guest]: deadline is actually a very good thing.
[Guest]: Even stories that I've written, you know, new stories that I write on deadlines, suddenly
[Guest]: you think, ah, gosh, I'm stupid.
[Guest]: This is what should be the opening of that story, you know.
[Guest]: Or here's the passage that I should end that, you know, really short piece with because
[Guest]: it's, you know, that's what is a really good send-off.
[Guest]: So those little bits of epiphanies and inspirations and sort of quiet thinking are also an extremely
[Guest]: important part of the creative process.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, everything within its own limits.
[Amit Varma]: And earlier you mentioned about how you start writing and you have this stand-up clickety-clackety
[Amit Varma]: typewriter which is, you know, making all kinds of sounds and then you move on to a
[Amit Varma]: laptop and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: Suddenly you're sending things by telex and fax and all that.
[Amit Varma]: Does the mode of writing also change the way that you write?
[Amit Varma]: Like I would imagine that when you're handwriting, at least when I'm handwriting, you know, it
[Amit Varma]: is and now I hardly write anymore by hand, but it is much slower and therefore it forces
[Amit Varma]: me to think more slowly, which could either be a feature or a bug.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, when we are, when I'm back in, when I started writing, I used to typewriter
[Amit Varma]: for a very brief while before, you know, the age of computers happened.
[Amit Varma]: And there's no backspace, you know, what you're typing is it, you know, so it is not final.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, you can type another draft, but it's so much of a pain that you're forced
[Amit Varma]: in a sense to perhaps be more considered, to construct a sentence in your head before
[Amit Varma]: you actually start with the sentence, you know, which might not be the case today where,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you can immediately backspace and you can write the thing and edit it on the
[Amit Varma]: page itself and you don't have to type it out again.
[Amit Varma]: So did you feel that difference in your writing that did the process actually make that kind
[Amit Varma]: of a difference at any point?
[Guest]: Actually surprisingly, no.
[Guest]: Strangely not.
[Guest]: It's funny.
[Guest]: You just adapt.
[Guest]: I think when I first started using a word process and realized I could just throw away
[Guest]: things and, you know, I got more fastidious, you know, kind of tidying, tidying things
[Guest]: up all the time and making sure that they're a bit more perfect all the time.
[Guest]: But I don't think it affected, strangely enough, it didn't affect the quality of the writing
[Guest]: so much, you know, oddly enough, you'd think that because you can write things over and
[Guest]: over again, it's easier.
[Guest]: So maybe it has to do with some process that you're, you know, suggesting about, you know,
[Guest]: just having to construct the idea in your head a bit more carefully, but I'm not even
[Guest]: sure if that's true.
[Guest]: There are also, you know, there are different kinds of writers.
[Guest]: I've watched, you know, friends of mine who write, you know, who start at the top of a
[Guest]: story and just keep writing sentence by sentence and will rewrite the same sentence 20 times
[Guest]: and then move on to the next one and rewrite that 20 times, then the next sentence 20 times,
[Guest]: next one.
[Guest]: I don't write that.
[Guest]: I just don't do it like that.
[Guest]: I mean, I write a paragraph and then go back and start fiddling with it, you know.
[Guest]: That's much more my way of doing things.
[Guest]: So I think to each their own kind of approach to how that unpacks itself, and the actual
[Guest]: technology is sort of almost immaterial, you know, word processors, you know, that is a
[Guest]: big revolution.
[Guest]: Obviously it makes things a lot easier.
[Guest]: I don't know if there's any sort of better or worse or orthodoxy to suggest in that.
[Amit Varma]: So in your book, you quote this lovely old proverb where you say, he who drinks the water
[Amit Varma]: of the Nile is destined to taste its sweetness again.
[Amit Varma]: And you've mentioned elsewhere about how, you know, going back to Cairo, you know, after
[Amit Varma]: being in America, was kind of a big deal for you.
[Amit Varma]: And that eventually led to the book where you felt that you had to write about this
[Amit Varma]: now.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about that.
[Amit Varma]: Because even, you know, I've heard you say this on another interview, which of course
[Amit Varma]: I'll link from the show notes where you spoke about how you were in the US and you kind
[Amit Varma]: of went to the docks and you saw a ship and it was going to Egypt.
[Amit Varma]: And you said, fuck, I have to be on that ship.
[Amit Varma]: And so tell me a little bit about that kind of process and you know, you know, what was
[Amit Varma]: it that made you want to go back?
[Amit Varma]: And when you went back, what did you see differently?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, how the book emerged out of that?
[Guest]: Yeah, well, I'd have to take myself, you know, back to be my 18, 19 year old self, because
[Guest]: I was kind of washed up in America.
[Guest]: I did a first year of college in the US, I got into quite a good college right after
[Guest]: boarding school.
[Guest]: I didn't even finish boarding school.
[Guest]: They let me in, I think they actually literally made a mistake and actually admitted me to
[Guest]: Wesleyan University, which is a very good university.
[Guest]: Without having finished high school, it was a mistake, it was an error on their part.
[Guest]: I sent in an application as a joke, literally, and I got admitted to the place.
[Guest]: And so, which was a mistake, because I went to this college where I had no idea what I
[Guest]: was doing there.
[Guest]: I was only 17 years old, I just didn't know what it was all about and didn't know what
[Guest]: I wanted to do.
[Guest]: And I sort of bombed out because I was just unhappy, I guess.
[Guest]: It's hard to explain.
[Guest]: And as a result, I find myself kind of washed up in America with no college degree, da-da-da.
[Guest]: And I had to kind of make up my mind at that quite young age of what to do with myself.
[Guest]: And I had a girlfriend who was in New York, and I spent the summer in New York City, and
[Guest]: I tried to make some money just to kind of get by and survive.
[Guest]: And the only job that I could find, well, not the only job, but I had this slight, because
[Guest]: I'm a very curious person, and slightly, you know, curious about everything, the job that
[Guest]: I found to keep myself alive for the summer was as an attendant in a gay bathhouse.
[Guest]: And this was at the height of gay promiscuity, you know, this is just before the AIDS epidemic.
[Guest]: I was an attendant in the St. Mark's Baths in New York City on the midnight to 8am shift
[Guest]: for a couple of months, which I must say, I saw some very peculiar things there.
[Guest]: I had quite an education.
[Guest]: But in any case, I was not quite sure what I wanted to do with my future, and I found
[Guest]: myself one morning in Brooklyn Heights, which overlooks New York Harbor.
[Guest]: And at the time, there were still actually functioning docks.
[Guest]: They're no longer functioning at all, haven't been for years, but at the time, there was
[Guest]: still actually a functioning dock there.
[Guest]: And I was trying to decide, you know, should I go back to Egypt?
[Guest]: Should I stay here?
[Guest]: This is a bit of a dead-end job that I'm doing, blah, blah, blah, what am I going to do?
[Guest]: And there was actually a ship that was in the harbor that was actually being loaded.
[Guest]: It was a sort of freighter, and I could see that there was the name of the ship on the
[Guest]: stern of the boat was sort of written, and the port that it came from.
[Guest]: And it was being loaded up with these big red buses, a crane was lifting them up and
[Guest]: putting them on.
[Guest]: And at the time, I knew that Egypt was getting a lot of aid from the US, including buses
[Guest]: for Cairo.
[Guest]: There were like buses being sent to Cairo.
[Guest]: Egypt had just signed this Camp David peace accords with Israel.
[Guest]: And as a kind of American payoff, there was a huge amount of American aid, including these
[Guest]: buses.
[Guest]: And I was thinking to myself, are those buses going to Egypt?
[Guest]: Why would there be loading buses in New York Harbor onto a ship?
[Guest]: I wonder where that boat is going.
[Guest]: And I pulled my glasses out of my breast pocket, I was wearing a jacket, pulled out my glasses,
[Guest]: and with the idea of like using the lens of the glass as a kind of like, you know, little
[Guest]: miniature telescope, which you can do that, I mean, it's kind of magnified a little bit.
[Guest]: And as I pulled out the glasses from my pocket, I hadn't really taken account of this.
[Guest]: I'd forgotten that my little roll of $100 bills that was like my savings was in that
[Guest]: breast pocket.
[Guest]: And I pulled out my glasses and this roll of $100 bills went up into the sky.
[Guest]: And there was a brisk wind, and it went, you know, all this money went flying off across
[Guest]: the docks across into New York Harbor.
[Guest]: And lo and behold, when I looked at the ship, it was actually from Alexandria and these
[Guest]: were buses going to Egypt, and it was going to Egypt.
[Guest]: And basically the only other possession I had, except for the sum of the money that
[Guest]: was in my wallet, I did have a return plane ticket to Cairo.
[Guest]: So I actually left Cairo very shortly afterwards.
[Guest]: So anyway, that's one of these mystical stories.
[Guest]: But who knows, it felt like fate was intervening to send me back to Cairo, and this was a message
[Guest]: of some kind.
[Guest]: You know, I'm taking your money, here's your ticket, get going, is a pretty direct message.
[Guest]: So that's what, you know, that's why I ended up back in Cairo.
[Guest]: But then, as I said, you know, writing a book about Cairo, which is many years later, I
[Guest]: mean, it wasn't until 15, 16, 17 years later that I actually published a book about Cairo.
[Guest]: In the first 10 years that I was living back in Cairo as a grown-up person, I had such
[Guest]: a wild time and relief that I felt I had a sort of debt to the city, I mean, you know,
[Guest]: which had been very kind to me.
[Guest]: I mean, lots of people had been kind to me.
[Guest]: And also I had done dangerous things and never gotten into serious trouble, and I just felt
[Guest]: like I'd had a lesson in humanity that only a place like Cairo can really teach you, you
[Guest]: know.
[Guest]: I mean, Mumbai is the same kind of place.
[Guest]: I mean, it's just so many layers of humanity doing so many crazy things all the time.
[Guest]: If you can actually start exploring those layers, you know, it's a fascinating thing.
[Guest]: The luxury of being able to do that in a place like Cairo, I always felt like I owed the
[Guest]: city something.
[Guest]: And the opportunity later came up to do a book, but that was again partly forced.
[Guest]: My whole life is like very few decisions, everything was like fate and things being
[Guest]: forced.
[Guest]: I was actually in London for a time because my wife got a scholarship to study in London,
[Guest]: and I went along as baggage to London.
[Guest]: At the time, I had only an American passport.
[Guest]: I now have a British passport, but at the time I had only an American passport.
[Guest]: It was very difficult to work in London.
[Guest]: There's nothing much I could do.
[Guest]: And so I needed to find some gainful employment.
[Guest]: And I managed to do a few things through semi-legally, but I really needed to find something.
[Guest]: And so the idea of doing a book on Cairo came up as a sort of necessity, actually.
[Guest]: And I happened to just write an inspired book proposal to do this book about Cairo and got
[Guest]: a bunch of different publishers bidding on it.
[Guest]: And so when I returned to Cairo, I returned armed with a book contract to write something
[Guest]: about Cairo.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, your book starts with this excellent quote from Thomas Gold Appleton
[Amit Varma]: from his Canal Journal, where he writes, quote, every year, a little deposit of mud is left
[Amit Varma]: by the Nile on his banks.
[Amit Varma]: And every year, he's deposited upon the counters of the London booksellers, the turbid overflow
[Amit Varma]: of journalizing travel.
[Amit Varma]: Alas, it has not the usefulness of the leavings of the sacred river, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And later, you yourself write, quote, books about cities were of two kinds.
[Amit Varma]: They were either travelogues or histories.
[Amit Varma]: And I knew that while a travel story could barely scratch the surface of Cairo's depth,
[Amit Varma]: a straight history was bound to found it in the immensity of the city's past, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: Both of which seem valid points.
[Amit Varma]: Like if I was, you know, if I was to consider writing about Mumbai, for example, I'd have
[Amit Varma]: exactly the same kind of thoughts.
[Amit Varma]: So how did the conception of the book then take shape in your mind?
[Amit Varma]: Like, were there any models where you could look at and say, okay, so and so book has
[Amit Varma]: been written in the way that I think, you know, I could write my book, like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: maybe it could be a book about a city, it could be a book about whatever, how do you
[Amit Varma]: then decide?
[Amit Varma]: Because then there is sort of the temptation, I'm guessing, to put in, you know, an impressionistic
[Amit Varma]: sense of whatever you have been through in that city and what it means to you and make
[Amit Varma]: it really personal.
[Amit Varma]: Then there is also that historical sense, you know, that broad sweep centuries and centuries
[Amit Varma]: and millennia of action happening there, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: And then there is also sort of a sense of stepping back a little bit and capturing society
[Amit Varma]: as it is now and capturing politics as it is now and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So you're trying this thing with multiple layers.
[Amit Varma]: So which of them was, you know, how did the book evolve?
[Amit Varma]: Like, was it a case that you decided to go for all of these or one of these or what was
[Guest]: your anchor as it were?
[Guest]: There really weren't many models.
[Guest]: In fact, there are kind of counter models.
[Guest]: I knew it.
[Guest]: I didn't want to do it like this.
[Guest]: I didn't want to do it like that.
[Guest]: So I didn't really have a model.
[Guest]: But also the idea for the book evolved as I wrote it.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, I warned you there's a lot of oozing in my life and not many decisions.
[Guest]: So the way that book came out in the end was really largely a product of the process of
[Guest]: writing it.
[Guest]: I started off in one direction and realized that that direction wasn't quite working,
[Guest]: and so I had to change direction.
[Guest]: So it meanders a bit.
[Guest]: One of the things I want to avoid with doing a book about Cairo is just to do like a chronology,
[Guest]: like a history of, blam, you know, it starts in one year, it goes the next year, and the
[Guest]: next year, the next dynasty, the next.
[Guest]: Because for Cairo, it just really is endless.
[Guest]: I mean, it's 5,000 years, it goes on and on and on and on, you know.
[Guest]: And not only that, but I wanted to write something that actually, I mean, as Thomas Appleton
[Guest]: suggests the mud on the banks of the Nile accumulating over time, I wanted to do something
[Guest]: that actually added to the pile of knowledge, you know, it wasn't just another book on Cairo.
[Guest]: And so my conception was that I wanted to write a book that was more thematic than linear.
[Guest]: You know, and I found a lot of repeating themes and cycles in Cairo, and I tried to make it
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: But actually, I discovered that it's difficult to escape from the chronology at the same
[Guest]: time, because you can't.
[Guest]: It doesn't make sense if you don't have the time element in there.
[Guest]: So the book does generally kind of follow a chronology from old to new, with cycles
[Guest]: in the middle of it, and it's kind of an unusual approach.
[Guest]: And you know, it risked not working at all, I think.
[Guest]: I also started off thinking it was going to be a much more personal book.
[Guest]: And part of the trouble with that is that I realized as I was writing the book that
[Guest]: I was getting annoyed with the sound of my voice, I was getting bored with myself, and
[Guest]: I realized that I'm a bit of a moaner.
[Guest]: You know, there's this section we mentioned before about people moaning about Cairo, used
[Guest]: to be better, used to be better, used to be better.
[Guest]: And I realized that I was a rather negative whiner about things, and the sound of my own
[Guest]: voice was going to be this whiny voice about how it all used to be much better.
[Guest]: So I got annoyed, I got tired of myself, and I also did a lot of research, and I kept finding
[Guest]: just fascinating things, and I wanted to put in all these fascinating things.
[Guest]: So basically, you get this kind of car crash with all of those elements happening at once,
[Guest]: and then trying to make a useful book out of it all.
[Guest]: And I think the slightly car crash element, at one stage I thought this is a bit of a
[Guest]: complicated mess to inflict on the reader, but also a city like Cairo is a bit of a car
[Guest]: crash.
[Guest]: It is a clash, and it is a bit of the personal, and a bit of the historical, and a bit confusing.
[Guest]: And if you don't understand this part, reach for Wikipedia, and if you like this bit, find
[Guest]: out more somewhere else.
[Guest]: And I didn't want to stick myself into it too, too closely, but there were some little
[Guest]: personal anecdotes that I thought were so telling that they really couldn't avoid putting
[Guest]: them in, stories that are just really strong.
[Guest]: So it's got all of that, and in the end, it's not a history of Cairo, it's actually a portrait
[Guest]: more than anything else.
[Guest]: So like a portrait, it's got layers, and perspective, and it accumulated over many sittings, so
[Guest]: to speak.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Sedimentary.
[Amit Varma]: And mentioning layers, you know, I love this quote from your book, which actually, I wouldn't
[Amit Varma]: call this a moan, I'd call it a lament, and a lament that one can share, you know, about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you have a lament about Cairo, I can have a lament about something in my local
[Amit Varma]: this thing, and we could just, but here's a quote, I grew weary of exploring the city,
[Amit Varma]: each successive visit to its old core, the zone of grand medieval mosques and palaces
[Amit Varma]: and bazaars, brought fresh evidence of further decay, marble buckled off walls, ancient minarets
[Amit Varma]: toppled into neighboring houses, and in the markets, plastic shoes and pharaonic t-shirts
[Amit Varma]: replaced camel hide slippers and satin kaftans, strolling one day downtown in what used to
[Amit Varma]: be the European quarter, I discovered one favorite cafe transformed into a tawdry jeans
[Amit Varma]: outlet and another replaced by a burger bar called Madonna's, the National Hotel, whose
[Amit Varma]: crusty broken keyed piano bar had once boasted a preposterous coterie of Second World War
[Amit Varma]: vintage prostitutes was bought and torn down by an Islamic investment company, when his
[Amit Varma]: pyramid scheme went bust, the site remained a gaping parking parking lot, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that, you know, if one was to write about Mumbai, for example, right,
[Amit Varma]: one would be the Mumbai that I see around me and that I've experienced. And no doubt
[Amit Varma]: as I dive further into it, because I'm writing about it and looking with a different kind
[Amit Varma]: of gaze, I'd notice things which were unseen to me, but which are now there when I see
[Amit Varma]: it. But a lot of what you're forced to do when you write about such a historical city
[Amit Varma]: is that you are sort of creating a lot of layers from imagination, not in a sense of
[Amit Varma]: making them up, but reading history, and you're having to imagine these layers and kind of
[Amit Varma]: superimpose them on what is kind of there. So you can look at an obelisk at a particular
[Amit Varma]: place and you can know, oh, this is a history and this is what happened to it in 1300. And
[Amit Varma]: this is what happened to it in 600, and so on and so forth. So does that deepen your
[Amit Varma]: understanding of the city? Or is that romanticizing it too much in the sense do you then just,
[Amit Varma]: you know, having written the thing, come down to ground and it is still the city that it
[Amit Varma]: is where you're living? Or are you left with a greater appreciation than the you who did
[Amit Varma]: not write that book in a parallel universe would have been left with?
[Guest]: Difficult to say. I mean, I, you know, it depends on your experience. It just happened
[Guest]: that I, I did a degree in Islamic history. I also used to do guided tours of the old
[Guest]: city in Cairo. I just spent, you know, years and years walking all over the city and back
[Guest]: streets and new people in every neighborhood. And you know, I just really, really, really
[Guest]: knew the cities so well. And so the historical side, you know, I just had accumulated a lot
[Guest]: of knowledge of that. So it's kind of second nature. It wasn't like something, you know,
[Guest]: that I chose to add that as a dimension to this book. It's actually part of your knowledge
[Guest]: of the place. You just, you know, you know that what used to stand on that corner was
[Guest]: different from what's there now, and it becomes part of the fabric as far as you experience
[Guest]: it. And, you know, if you're writing a book about a place, you want to convey some of
[Guest]: that, you know, texture and depth of knowledge. You know, it's not as if somebody who isn't
[Guest]: aware of all that background won't have, you know, equally strong, you know, experience
[Guest]: of a place and, you know, and equally valid, you know, obviously. But I don't know, I think
[Guest]: there's a…then perhaps they wouldn't be inspired to write a book about it, you know.
[Guest]: Or they would write a different kind of book, you know. You know, Sukhothu Mehta's book
[Guest]: about this, about Mumbai, doesn't go into the history very much. You know, that's not
[Guest]: his interest. That's not his thing. He's, you know, so, you know, depends with what's
[Guest]: your approach. Also, I mean, you know, to toot a little horn for Cairo, I mean, you
[Guest]: know, Mumbai is what, 200 years old? You know, I mean, this is nothing.
[Amit Varma]: Nothing. It's like spring chicken of a city compared to, yeah. You have another great
[Amit Varma]: line which indicates this, where you said, quote, tombs…and this is, you're describing
[Amit Varma]: what happened after the Ottomans came and took over. And you write, quote, tombs crumbled
[Amit Varma]: in the outlying parts of the city of the dead. The ruins merged with the grey refuse heaps
[Amit Varma]: that now smothered long abandoned quarters of Misr al-Fustat. So, which is another great
[Amit Varma]: way of saying it. Let's let's take a quick sort of commercial break now. And at the other
[Amit Varma]: end of the break, we'll talk more about Cairo and then we'll get to talking about India
[Amit Varma]: as well. And perhaps I can persuade you to read some of this kinky non-kinky book that
[Amit Varma]: you've written.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer but never quite gotten down to it? Well, I'd love
[Amit Varma]: to help you. Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course, The Art of
[Amit Varma]: Clear Writing. An online community has now sprung up of all my past students. We have
[Amit Varma]: workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students, and vibrant community interaction.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing. There are many exercises, much interaction,
[Amit Varma]: a lovely and lively community at the end of it. The course costs rupees 10,000 plus GST
[Amit Varma]: or about $150 and is a monthly thing. So if you're interested, head on over to register
[Amit Varma]: at IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing. That's IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing. Being
[Amit Varma]: a good writer doesn't require God-given talent, just the willingness to work hard and a clear
[Amit Varma]: idea of what you need to do to refine your skills. I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Max Roddenbeck about, about
[Amit Varma]: his life, about his work, and right now about Cairo also. So, you know, going back to this
[Amit Varma]: book, you know, once you sort of start writing it, like, typically, I think what happens
[Amit Varma]: is when you conceive of writing your first book, initially, there is that excitement
[Amit Varma]: that, oh, I'm going to write a book and you're animated with the force of the idea. And then
[Amit Varma]: there is also a moment of panic, because you're like, what have I taken on? And you might
[Amit Varma]: even have the sort of imposter syndrome that, you know, it's a good idea, but can I do this?
[Amit Varma]: Am I good enough to execute this idea, as it were? So what was it like you kind of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, dipping into the book? Did you just sort of go into it with the confidence of
[Amit Varma]: you saying that, yeah, you know, I have an idea, let's just start all of that. And how
[Amit Varma]: did you then build those processes where, you know, did you have a set writing routine?
[Amit Varma]: What did you do for research? These are the days before the internet. So you've got to,
[Amit Varma]: you know, look for physical objects called books or papers or whatever, to actually do
[Amit Varma]: your research. So how did all of that work out?
[Guest]: It's kind of, to tell the truth, all of the above, you know, all of the doubts, all of
[Guest]: the anxieties, all of the missteps, the wrong roads taken, everything. And it took four
[Guest]: years to do that book, of which about, you know, two years, a year and a half, two years
[Guest]: were largely research. And I had access to a really good library in Cairo. And I also
[Guest]: had my own collection of stuff, and my own family had some books and things that were
[Guest]: interesting. And also, I had a lot of friends who were well-informed. So I had no shortage
[Guest]: of sources, but I did a lot of library research for that book, because it covers, you know,
[Guest]: 5,000 years. So there's, you know, Pharaonic history, there's Roman history, Greek history,
[Guest]: Arab history, Turkish history, it's all sort of piles into Cairo. So there was a great
[Guest]: deal of that. And I just kind of came up with my own research method, which I subsequently
[Guest]: discovered that other people do very much the same kind of thing, which was that I did
[Guest]: a lot of note-taking on note cards, I mean, just on big note cards. So, you know, I'd
[Guest]: read a book and, you know, take notes from that book, and that would fill up five note
[Guest]: cards or three note cards or just one note card, or maybe just one sentence, you know,
[Guest]: a quote or something like that. And I, in the end, I numbered all the note cards, and
[Guest]: I had, you know, hundreds of them. And then when I was actually writing a chapter, I numbered
[Guest]: all the note cards. And then when I'd find a theme, I made an index for myself. So, you
[Guest]: know, so for example, laments about the past. And then I would find laments about the past
[Guest]: from the Pharaonic era and the, you know, Turkish occupation and, you know, World War
[Guest]: II. And, you know, so I'd find them from all these different parts of history. So I made
[Guest]: a kind of index for myself. And when I was doing like a chapter outline, I would just
[Guest]: list the different numbers of cards that I'd be using. And that actually worked quite well.
[Guest]: That's all pre, you know, computer. You couldn't do that all on, you know, with a program now,
[Guest]: but it still works quite well. And I was actually interested, just a couple of years ago, I
[Guest]: was listening to some very famous, successful writer. I think it was Larry Wright, you know,
[Guest]: who's written a pile of great books about many things, including about COVID, I think
[Guest]: most recently. And he was describing a method that he uses, nonfiction books, that is very
[Guest]: similar actually. So, but there was a great deal of hit or miss in terms of the rollercoaster
[Guest]: of writing a book. You start off and you think, Oh my God, I sound like such an idiot. And
[Guest]: I actually did a nearly complete draft of my book and then showed it to a friend of
[Guest]: mine, a publisher, who was actually sort of cruel and kind enough to say, you know, something,
[Guest]: this is going the wrong way, you know, start over basically, which was a really hard message
[Guest]: to swallow because I'd spent a year writing, you know, something like that. And I actually
[Guest]: followed his advice and did that. And it did make a big difference. I also have to say
[Guest]: that there was a period when I was the sort of doing the most of the actual writing when
[Guest]: we were living in Tunisia and I was not doing much work. It was my wife who was actually
[Guest]: making the income, earning the bread and butter. So I had the luxury of actually just working
[Guest]: on this book and that makes a huge difference, I have to say. I mean, you know, good literature
[Guest]: is wonderful, but earning a living is also a necessity. So I did have that luxury for
[Guest]: at least a year when I could actually take time off to writing a book. And when I say
[Guest]: it took four years, the other three years, I also had to work at the same time and, you
[Guest]: know, and you just have to be very disciplined, which I'm generally not actually, but, you
[Amit Varma]: know, you learn to be.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And it's that method called Zettelkasten, your way of taking notes, because there's
[Amit Varma]: a very similar method, I think, where, you know, evolved in Germany, where people have
[Amit Varma]: this card system and categorization system. And that was, in fact, the inspiration for
[Amit Varma]: the software I use, which is called Rome Research, which is exactly like kind of that, where
[Amit Varma]: you have your nested entries and your bidirectional linking and all of that.
[Guest]: So I just invented it myself, frankly. So you can call it the Max version, if you like,
[Amit Varma]: you know.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. Or Maxkasten.
[Amit Varma]: Maxkasten.
[Amit Varma]: Maxkasten, as it were. So at this point, when you're sort of writing about Egypt, and the
[Amit Varma]: historical chapters are incredible, and there are so many great sort of excerpts from them.
[Amit Varma]: I was particularly interested really in the last few decades, of course, your book came
[Amit Varma]: out in the late 90s and 98, I think, right. And I was interested, perhaps in the five or six decades
[Amit Varma]: before that, because it struck me at every level that what is happening in Egyptian society,
[Amit Varma]: and Egyptian politics, also informs how one can think about societies elsewhere, and politics
[Amit Varma]: elsewhere, and all of that. So tell me a little bit about, you know, what was, how did Egypt
[Amit Varma]: evolve as a society, through those years, through those decades, because, you know,
[Amit Varma]: on the one hand, you have the world sort of modernizing and opening up and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: On the other hand, you have sort of the rise of fundamentalists, as well, Islamists, as
[Amit Varma]: it were, and that's changing fashion that's leading to, you know, like, this is great
[Amit Varma]: passage I'll read out, which, you know, which is so absurd that it is something that I can
[Amit Varma]: imagine happening right here, though it is, you know, where the passage goes, quote, more
[Amit Varma]: often, though, it was a killjoy fanaticism of some fundamentalists that provoked laughs,
[Amit Varma]: and this ridicule probably damaged their cause more than police muscle. One preacher declared
[Amit Varma]: that zucchini should be outlawed because of his suggestive shape. Another fatwa from an
[Amit Varma]: Islamist gang appeared in the papers, and now you're quoting the fatwa, the Cairo Tower
[Amit Varma]: is against religion and Islamic Sharia law, it must be destroyed, as its shape and construction
[Amit Varma]: amid greenery could excite Egyptian women. That quote stops and now you continue. But
[Amit Varma]: after the outspoken secularist Farhad Foda made fun of such nonsense in a debate at the
[Amit Varma]: Cairo Book Fair, he was assassinated, stop quote, right. And this seems at one level
[Amit Varma]: to what we saw in Bangladesh also, where you had a bunch of rationalists and a couple of
[Amit Varma]: atheist bloggers are used to enjoy reading and they were kind of killed. And you see
[Amit Varma]: this kind of fundamentalism on the rise in India as well. Right. So it doesn't matter
[Amit Varma]: what the source of the fundamentalism is, whether it's Islamism or whether it's a mistaken
[Amit Varma]: notion of what Hinduism is. But so what are the sort of pulls and pressures out here?
[Amit Varma]: Because on the one hand, it seems to me that, you know, in Cairo, you have a similar thing
[Amit Varma]: to what you have in Delhi, which is you have a set of elites, and you have sort of a set
[Amit Varma]: of non elites, and they're living in different worlds. And you could argue that the elites
[Amit Varma]: are, you know, living in more of a bubble. But you know, what, so what impact does that
[Amit Varma]: have on society?
[Guest]: Yeah, this is, this is a fantastically huge and wobbly question. Yeah, I mean, you've
[Guest]: asked me to describe five decades of social history of a place like Cairo.
[Unknown]: You can do it.
[Guest]: Wow. It's, you know, it's changed radically. And it's gone through a lot of things. Every
[Guest]: big city, you know, every great city is a kind of mirror to the whole world. I mean,
[Guest]: you know, you could sit in a place like Cairo and really understand giant changes all around
[Guest]: the world. Of course, they have their particularities, and they go in their own ways. But of course,
[Guest]: there are reflections. And I mean, you know, one of the reasons why, you know, I felt so
[Guest]: at home in India is that there's so much that is so parallel to what's happened in a place
[Guest]: like Egypt. And, of course, one of the most striking things that happened in Egypt over
[Guest]: the last five, six decades has been the role of kind of religion in public life, where,
[Guest]: you know, you had a country that was really very largely secularized in the 1950s. You
[Guest]: know, if you just take as one indicator, what people wear, clothes is a boring thing, you
[Guest]: know, everyone goes on about the veil, blah, blah, blah, it's, I find it very tiresome
[Guest]: to tell the truth. But in the 1950s, the veil was absolutely out in Egypt, it was just not
[Guest]: a thing, you know, it just wasn't a thing. I mean, people did not wear these things.
[Guest]: It was gone, and had been gone for some time. In Egyptian cinema, there was just no one
[Guest]: wore a veil. You'd go to the beach, and people would be in bathing suits, and this was not
[Guest]: an issue, you know, it just wasn't a thing. Particularly among urban educated people,
[Guest]: it just was gone. In the countryside, of course, more conservative, etc., etc., conservative
[Guest]: about marriage, etc., etc. But there wasn't such a religious heaviness about things. And
[Guest]: that in Egypt, you know, that changed radically in the 1970s, 1980s, 1990s, and kind of peaked
[Guest]: in a phase of, you know, Islamic kind of extremism. But it wasn't just the extremist end, it kind
[Guest]: of affected all of society, and people became much more, obviously, outspokenly pious. And
[Guest]: you suddenly had to start speaking in a more pious sounding way, and, you know, behaving
[Guest]: in a more obviously, you know, quote unquote, Islamic way. And it wasn't just Muslims. Also,
[Guest]: Egypt has a very large Christian minority. Same thing happened to Egyptian Christians.
[Guest]: They suddenly all began attending church all over again, etc., etc. And for someone who's
[Guest]: rather secular, myself, this was all rather disturbing and tiresome, I have to say, and
[Guest]: also violent, which is, you know, adds to the misery. But all these trends are, you
[Guest]: know, they've happened in other places. You know, coming to India, there are, you know,
[Guest]: immediate parallels. India hasn't gone to the kind of extremes of kind of religiosity
[Guest]: that Egypt went through, which really got very silly about, you know, suggestiveness
[Guest]: of a vegetable is really, you know, beyond. But there are some very silly elements in
[Guest]: India as well. One thing that is striking, though, is that some of the organized sort
[Guest]: of political religious groups, whether one is Muslim, or one is Hindu, and I have a lot
[Guest]: of experience of both, I've written about both extensively and met a lot of people from
[Guest]: both, is how remarkably similar they are. I mean, they're the same kind of people, the
[Guest]: same social class, the same grudge, exactly the same grudges against many, many, many
[Guest]: different things. And if you go back to the origins of, say, Muslim Brotherhood or RSS,
[Guest]: they date from precisely the same decade. It's the same kind of people of the same social
[Guest]: class, provincial, you know, often first generation engineer doctor, get very fired up. They're
[Guest]: answering the same questions, you know, why did these ghastly, you know, British invade
[Guest]: our country? And why were we weak at the time? And finding answers that are strikingly similar,
[Guest]: you know, we must go back to our original, you know, we must unite, we must be proud
[Guest]: of our, you know, religion, etc, etc. I mean, you know, the parallels are glaring, including
[Guest]: organizational structure, the way they managed to escape the pressure of the state by kind
[Guest]: of hiding underground, the way they multiply different organizations, trade unions, etc,
[Guest]: etc, women's groups, blah, blah, blah, farmers unions. There is a parallel between the Muslim
[Guest]: Brotherhood and the RSS, which is just, you know, unmistakable for those who've seen both.
[Guest]: There are a few people that actually watched both happen, and that's sort of, that's something
[Guest]: that I have seen. And process of kind of the way a kind of neo version of religion seeps
[Guest]: into things is something that I've witnessed at first hand. And it's, I think it's for
[Guest]: the same causes, actually, is that, you know, as societies urbanize very quickly, and as
[Guest]: you say, there are elites living in their bubble, and there are people who want to join
[Guest]: the elite, but they know they're not going to join the elite. They're not going to suddenly
[Guest]: be, you know, cosmopolitan international, you know, St. Stephen's graduates, you know,
[Guest]: who go on to man large international corporations, and it's not going to happen. So they'd like
[Guest]: to find pride in what they already have, which is all perfectly understandable. But then
[Guest]: there are people willing to exploit this kind of grudge and ambition for political ends.
[Guest]: And you get, you know, groups that look very similar and, you know, aim for power, basically,
[Guest]: to take over power. And the possibility of taking over power becomes very attractive,
[Guest]: you know. So we've went through all of that in Egypt, you know, exactly that sort of thing.
[Guest]: And then often what happens is you get splinters, and then out of these kind of mainstream groups
[Guest]: that have often led by perfectly middle-class people, you get much more fanatical groups
[Guest]: that cause the real damage. But in the process, though, you get what happened in Egypt was,
[Guest]: and I think, you know, to some extent it's similar in Egypt, newly urbanized people who
[Guest]: are uprooted from their village, they've lost their social context in many ways, they want
[Guest]: to find a new context, and they want to feel a certain pride in their identity. And, you
[Guest]: know, so they grasp onto some notion of religious tradition, which is often surprisingly, you
[Guest]: know, in the case of Egypt, it's in some ways not a very authentic tradition. It's a reinvented
[Guest]: tradition, you know, whose aims are largely political, actually, you know. So a lot of
[Guest]: the, you know, Islamism in the world is less of a return to Islam than it is just a sort
[Guest]: of grab for power, actually, of one kind or another, for the powerless, people who feel
[Guest]: powerless, people who feel impotent. And actually impotence, the sexual side, has a lot to do
[Guest]: with the whole story, to tell the truth. Anyway, that's a very convoluted answer to your equally
[Guest]: convoluted question that I was actually leading in slightly different directions, probably.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'll double click on different aspects of it. Now, I was reading your essay on Saeed
[Amit Varma]: Qutub in NYRB, and there I came across two quotes by him in 1938 and 1959, respectively,
[Amit Varma]: and I was struck by the contrast between the quotes. And the first of those is, and this
[Amit Varma]: is Saeed Qutub's words, quote, religion, religion, this is a battle cry of the feeble and the
[Amit Varma]: weak person who defends himself with it whenever the current threatens to sweep him away, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote. And the other one in 1959 says, quote, humanity will see no tranquility or accord
[Amit Varma]: nor can peace, progress or material and spiritual advances be made without total recourse to
[Amit Varma]: God, stop quote. So, on the one hand, it seems that during this time, there is some kind
[Amit Varma]: of radicalization which has happened. Now, the question that I have with regard to this,
[Amit Varma]: and the question is both about India and Egypt, and you can focus on whatever aspect of it
[Amit Varma]: is that in India, what I have increasingly come to conclude is that this became to a
[Amit Varma]: certain extent, a question of supply and demand in the marketplace of bigotry. So to say,
[Amit Varma]: the supply was only there because the demand was there. Our society was sort of like this,
[Amit Varma]: you know, one book which, you know, talks about it superbly is Akshay Mukul's book on
[Amit Varma]: the Gita Press, and I did an episode with him. And what one realizes from that book
[Amit Varma]: is that these strains of bigotry were always there, you know, in India. And, and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: they were subdued for a while, but they were sort of there. And what we have in modern
[Amit Varma]: times is a situation where because of a bunch of different reasons, our incentives are driving
[Amit Varma]: us to the extremes, right? So on social media, one way that, you know, polarization happens
[Amit Varma]: and we are being driven to the extremes is that once you go on social media, you find
[Amit Varma]: your tribe, so to say, your incentive is to raise your status within the tribe. And you
[Amit Varma]: can do this within your tribe. And you can do this by, you know, becoming shriller than
[Amit Varma]: the next guy by attacking people on the other side and never engaging with their arguments,
[Amit Varma]: just attacking them, or attacking people on your own side for purity, for, you know, imposing
[Amit Varma]: purity tests on them. And what then happens is that on either side, the left and the right,
[Amit Varma]: and in this case, we're talking, of course, about religious fundamentalists, you're driven
[Amit Varma]: to extremes. Like recently, there was that congregation, the Hindu Mahasambhelan at,
[Amit Varma]: you know, where a bunch of supposedly holy men gave those really extreme speeches, basically
[Amit Varma]: calling for genocide. And my sense was that what happened there was this incentive playing
[Amit Varma]: itself out. If it was one person talking to a crowd that one person may not have been
[Amit Varma]: so extreme, but they're competing with each other to rouse passions. So they are all going
[Amit Varma]: one beyond the next. And then once you take that public position, you are sort of driven
[Amit Varma]: firmly there. And the only way you can keep competing is by getting even more extreme
[Amit Varma]: and God knows where this ends up. So now in the context of Egypt, does the same thing
[Amit Varma]: hold true? That, you know, you had these strains in society, the demand was there, that is
[Amit Varma]: why the supply kind of came. Maybe if society was different, maybe if it was much more moderate,
[Amit Varma]: Qutub, who is, of course, in a sense, a founding father of modern Islamism, and so on and so
[Amit Varma]: forth, might himself have gone in a different direction if that market wasn't there, so
[Amit Varma]: to say, for him. So one, the question is in the context of Egypt, and two, what do you
[Amit Varma]: think about the Indian context also, what I just said?
[Guest]: Yeah, no, I think you're absolutely right. There's a marketplace out there, and it's
[Guest]: being exploited. I'm not sort of sure if it's the demand so much that the demand is already
[Guest]: there in terms of the bigotry, there's a sort of pre-existing bigotry. I mean, that's uncertainly
[Guest]: true, you know, but I think a lot of it is sort of market creation by the people who
[Guest]: are selling these goods. They create the market for themselves. And as you say, the incentive
[Guest]: is to raise the ante, and this can go on ad absurdum. That's why my experience of the
[Guest]: Middle East does make me worried about India, because India is not at that stage yet. But
[Guest]: one has watched this phenomenon exactly, as you say, it's like an auction, you know, raising
[Guest]: the ante, raising the voice, raising the level of extremism. And how this played out with
[Guest]: the Islamist fundamentalism is pretty horrific, you know, I mean, because it kept ratcheting
[Guest]: up from one version of extremism to something you couldn't imagine it could be more extreme.
[Guest]: Well, then it is more extreme, and then it's even more extreme, and then even more extreme.
[Guest]: And of course, you know, this takes things way beyond the realm of your average person,
[Guest]: you know, your average Muslim, for example, has nothing to do with this Islamic state,
[Guest]: you know, madness, you know. And it's something that I, you know, wrote about in the New York
[Guest]: Review of Books quite early on, actually, I mean, right after 9-11, I did a lot of writing
[Guest]: about, you know, critical criticism of the Western response to 9-11, is that they didn't
[Guest]: understand that a lot of what's going on is actually, you know, marketplace is a good
[Guest]: analogy. It's a form of advertising, you know, your extremism is your advertising, you know,
[Guest]: we are this angry, therefore, we will do such and such, you know, we are this mad, we are
[Guest]: this, you know, committed, we will, it's a way of like showing off your level of commitment
[Guest]: and anger. And unfortunately, that is the kind of thing that you're getting now the
[Guest]: beginnings of in India with some of the kinds of speech and the, you know, sort of rather
[Guest]: frightening, you know, raising of the ante, you know, we are this angry, we are this determined,
[Guest]: we are this, you know, it's attitudinal. But it's hard to resist that. I mean, you know,
[Guest]: how do you counter that? And it does become inspiring for a lot of frustrated, young guys
[Guest]: mostly, who want to do something meaningful, you know, want to be something, want to get
[Guest]: somewhere, and don't see many possibilities, quite realistically, you know, in their, in
[Guest]: the current setup. And so, there are foot soldiers who swallow this stuff. And so, that
[Guest]: is a bit disturbing. Yeah. Yeah. Yep.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I did an episode recently with Mukulika Banerjee, which will release after we are
[Amit Varma]: recording this, it will release tomorrow. We are recording this a day before it releases.
[Amit Varma]: But she wrote this great book called the Pathan Unarmed. And her, the central question she
[Amit Varma]: asked herself as a young PhD student in 1988, when Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan died, Khan Abdul
[Amit Varma]: Ghaffar Khan, of course, known as Frontier Gandhi in India also led this massive nonviolent
[Amit Varma]: movement in the Northwest frontier province of Pashtunistan. Now, and his folks were called
[Amit Varma]: the Khudai Khidmatgar, or servants of God. And Mukulika's question was this, that how
[Amit Varma]: can this incredible nonviolent movement arise from a society, which was considered, which
[Amit Varma]: was stereotyped as being fundamentally violent and macho and all of that. So, one, you know,
[Guest]: the Pashtuns, who are martial races and all that, martial races and all that nonsense.
[Amit Varma]: So one, the Pashtuns are stereotyped like that. Two, Islam is stereotyped like that
[Amit Varma]: as, you know, having violence in its DNA. And so she went there, lived there for a long
[Amit Varma]: time among the tribes, came back, took 10 years, wrote a book, stunning book, and it's
[Amit Varma]: oddly not available on Amazon, but pirated copies are easy to find. And, and the conclusion
[Amit Varma]: was that the nonviolence did not emerge from, you know, Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan getting
[Amit Varma]: inspired by Gandhi. And it did not come from the West, it was not a Western import, like
[Amit Varma]: people say liberalism is a Western import, even Nehru said that, well, you know, striking
[Amit Varma]: down free speech with the First Amendment, but it's not. Her conclusion was that it came
[Amit Varma]: out of the fundamental tenets of Islam itself, it came out of the community, it came from
[Amit Varma]: within, that that is what they were like. And, and to me, it's, it's an extremely powerful
[Amit Varma]: antidote to the stereotypical notion that kind of goes around. And two thoughts here,
[Amit Varma]: one thought is that what we see on social media, in a sense, has a mirror in the real
[Amit Varma]: world as well, which is not surprising, obviously, but social media amplifies everything. Whereas
[Amit Varma]: in social media, if you look at the discourse on Twitter, and all the shouting and everything,
[Amit Varma]: you have vocal minorities that are really extreme, but the silent majority is not extreme
[Amit Varma]: at all, they're chilled out and reasonable, and so on and so forth. And one, I would imagine
[Amit Varma]: that's, that's obviously the case in the real world as well. Right. And that's sort of number
[Amit Varma]: one. And number two, that it is far easier to rouse people and to build advertising campaigns
[Amit Varma]: with, you know, with a rhetoric of hate than a rhetoric of nonviolence and love. You know,
[Amit Varma]: like Carl Schmitt famously said that in politics, you need an enemy, you need another. So it's
[Amit Varma]: far easier to rouse people with anger than to rouse people with love. And it's unfortunate,
[Amit Varma]: but that is sort of the way it seems to me. So you know, one, what do you think about
[Amit Varma]: that? And two, you said that your experience of the Middle East makes you worried about
[Amit Varma]: India. And you already elaborated why that is that the extremism just keeps getting ratcheted
[Amit Varma]: up and all that. But I'd like you to elaborate nevertheless, because I think what I see in
[Amit Varma]: India today is the extremism is getting ratcheted up. And you've seen it ratcheted up like this
[Amit Varma]: to a particular level, and then you've seen it go far beyond. So just, you know, so if
[Amit Varma]: you can elaborate a little bit more on, you know, what makes you worried about it?
[Guest]: Yeah, no, unquestionably, the rhetoric of hate is what rouses people. And I think there's
[Guest]: also the sort of environment is really important in the context in which this rhetoric of hate
[Guest]: sort of gets implanted. I think a key ingredient is that people are in a state of confusion.
[Guest]: You know, you live in a confusing world and a slightly menacing world. And if someone
[Guest]: can tell you that your problems are because of something or someone, then, you know, that's
[Guest]: great. You know, a simple message like that, blame it on someone, you know, blame it on
[Guest]: something. And, you know, unfortunately, I think also at the, you know, not at the sort
[Guest]: of national level, but at the kind of village level of bigotry and hate speech, there's
[Guest]: confusion, there's fear of the future. And there's also greed and envy, you know, one
[Guest]: should not forget those qualities. It's something that I've seen, you know, in a place like
[Guest]: Egypt, the conflict is between a 90% Muslim majority and a 10% Christian minority. And
[Guest]: some of the like villages where I've seen this play out in very much the same way you
[Guest]: have here in India, I mean, really similar, just the same sort of textbook, you know,
[Guest]: there's a provocation, there's a clash, who gets punished, it's the minority, basically,
[Guest]: in the end, the one who loses, it's the minority. And then very often what you find out is in
[Guest]: the end, or an underlying factor is that there is property involved, land involved, assets
[Guest]: involved, that end up getting taken over, you know. And there's, you know, there's actually
[Guest]: an element of social pressure in some circumstances where it's actually the resources are limited
[Guest]: and, you know, there's too much fight, too much struggle over the same limited resources.
[Guest]: And you can find that even in like urban slums, for example, there's when pressures build,
[Guest]: it can break out in something communal, you know. And of course, when there are people
[Guest]: out there, they're willing to exploit all these fissures and problems and envies and,
[Guest]: you know, jealousies and worries and fears, and turn it all into one message of, you know,
[Guest]: let's go and clobber those guys because they are who they are, you know, you get bad results.
[Guest]: And I'm afraid it's kind of universal. And, you know, that's nothing new. It's nothing
[Guest]: new about that at all. And of course, even in India, it's been playing out for years.
[Guest]: I mean, there's a kind of pattern to these communal things that goes back decades, centuries,
[Guest]: you know, God knows how long, a very long time. But, you know, there's fertile ground
[Guest]: in particular times that may be, you know, the ground may be more fertile at particular
[Guest]: times than at others. And there may be, you know, for one reason or another, less pushback,
[Guest]: you know, from saner voices at one time or another. And, you know, of course, one of
[Guest]: the things that's slightly worrying about India right now is that there's a lot that's
[Guest]: enabling and not enough that's pushing back against the kind of worst instincts. I mean,
[Guest]: that's one's impression, you know. And, you know, opening the newspaper and reading it
[Guest]: every day can be very dismaying, you know. There's just something so unnecessary about
[Guest]: the level of sort of, you know, hate speech is one way, one thing to call it, or just
[Guest]: sort of general disrespect, lack of curiosity, even, or attempt to explain, but just blame,
[Guest]: blame, blame, blame, you know, it's not a very healthy level of national conversation
[Amit Varma]: right now.
[Amit Varma]: And let's also sort of talk about the other sort of commonality that I found, which is
[Amit Varma]: that which is that whole disjunction between the elites and the people. And in your book,
[Amit Varma]: you write, quote, Cairo's establishment is used to imposing its own image on the rest
[Amit Varma]: of Egypt. The critic Louis Havard neatly expressed the city intellectuals attitude to communists
[Amit Varma]: 30 years ago, when he declared it their duty to rescue their fellows from what he called,
[Amit Varma]: quote, the hellish coarseness lurking around them like a cowl waiting to ambush them and
[Amit Varma]: swallow them up. And his quote stops here, you continue. What Havard had in mind was
[Amit Varma]: what he saw as a need to guide tradition bound Egyptians to more modern secular notions of
[Amit Varma]: citizenship. Yet his sense of mission and his fear of the ignorant mob reflected a sense
[Amit Varma]: of distance from the masses that was little different from that assumed by Memphite nobles
[Amit Varma]: or medieval Mamluks. And later you write, the apathy of the wider public brings Cairo's
[Amit Varma]: fractious sinking elite together in a shared sense of alienation. Secularists feel alienated
[Amit Varma]: from the religious discourse that is still the mainstream of popular expression. Religious
[Amit Varma]: radicals feel alienated from the Western influence they see as steadily encroaching on their
[Amit Varma]: Islamic heritage. The one group is accused of aping the West, the other of trying to
[Amit Varma]: recreate the past. Between these two extremes, other kinds of tension surface, the struggle
[Amit Varma]: between the entrenched father knows best generation and younger voices clamoring for the oxygen
[Amit Varma]: of free debate, stop quote. And those sort of the younger voices clamoring for the oxygen
[Amit Varma]: of free debate is perhaps not something that necessarily holds in India's case. Like I
[Amit Varma]: had an episode with Mini S who'd done some fantastic data journalism that showed that
[Amit Varma]: young people are actually more bigoted than younger people in India today. So then older
[Amit Varma]: people in India today. So that's kind of tragic. But given that, you know, just by landing
[Amit Varma]: up in Delhi, you become one of Delhi's elites, you're one among them. They are the people
[Amit Varma]: you're meeting every day and chatting with and all of that. They are sort of your interlocutors
[Amit Varma]: in that sense. So you've perhaps seen a little picture of this from the inside. So what is
[Amit Varma]: sort of your sense of your sense of this?
[Guest]: Gosh, I have so many different impressions. First thing I'd like to say is that, yeah,
[Guest]: I was very privileged to sort of land in the Delhi elite, which is actually full of wonderful
[Guest]: people. I mean, it's been a great, fantastic pleasure of being in India. It's just the
[Guest]: quality of conversation and intellect that one comes across here is just mind blowing.
[Guest]: It's fantastic. It's truly one of the great things about India. It's been constantly stimulating
[Guest]: and people are fantastically engaged, curious, also committed, caring, you know. But it is
[Guest]: a frothy top of society. And it's not to say that one has to be at the top of society to
[Guest]: be all of those wonderful things, brilliant people at every level of society. But, you
[Guest]: know, the sort of chattering classes of Delhi is a very, you know, engaging kind of world
[Guest]: to have the pleasure and privilege to be part of for some time. But yes, trying to bring,
[Guest]: you know, messages of tolerance and so on to a wider public is very difficult. You often
[Guest]: feel like, you know, you're struggling against a huge tide. And, you know, there are failings.
[Guest]: This happened in Egypt, just as in India, in a slightly different way. But this kind
[Guest]: of, you know, secular elite that took over these newly independent, fresh countries back
[Guest]: in the 1950s and 60s, a lot of very idealistic people, a lot of people from the left, they
[Guest]: were, in both countries, economically rather catastrophic guidance. And, you know, sort
[Guest]: of slowed things down, held them back in ways that were unfortunate for both Egypt and India.
[Guest]: Very similar, you know, parallels. You know, the great friendship between Nehru and Nasser
[Guest]: is, tells you all you need to know. Both interesting, amazing, but flawed people. Nasser had one
[Guest]: extra flaw, which is that he was also rather cruel, which that was not a failing of Nehru.
[Guest]: And it by any means, he was a very humane person. But yes, yeah, the sort of failing
[Guest]: of that, you know, post-independence elite was, despite efforts, you know, was not to
[Guest]: sort of spread the word, you know. I mean, there's been a failure of education, big time,
[Guest]: in both countries. In Egypt, in some ways, it's even more obvious because the government
[Guest]: introduced universal education kind of overnight. And suddenly every school, every classroom
[Guest]: had 200 kids in it. And it was just like out of hand, you know, just that you couldn't
[Guest]: possibly, all the universities became free public universities. Great. But, you know,
[Guest]: suddenly Cairo University, which had been an excellent and rather elite institution,
[Guest]: suddenly had 200,000 students and a degree became worthless, you know, in the real marketplace.
[Guest]: So there's a kind of degrading of quality at the expense of quantity. You know, it's
[Guest]: been a different trajectory in India, but the outcome has been in some ways the same,
[Guest]: that you get an elite that's successful at replicating itself and producing more brilliant
[Guest]: people from the elite. In India, unfortunately, it's also often caste-associated too, you
[Guest]: know, a replication. But there's been a fairly broad failure to bring up enough people. And
[Guest]: even this terminology is contentious, say, bring up, you know, raise up. I sound like,
[Guest]: you know, Louis Awad there, you know, who were just criticizing an Egyptian historian.
[Guest]: But at least to sort of make society feel inclusive to more people, to give people prospects
[Guest]: and to widen their horizons, make them think about a broader picture than just who is my
[Guest]: immediate enemy? You know, who should I blame things on? You know, unfortunately, they're
[Guest]: just all too many people who are still kind of, see, appear to be trapped in that way
[Guest]: of thinking.
[Amit Varma]: I agree about that failure entirely. You know, I have consistently held that, you know, we
[Amit Varma]: had a liberal elite kind of trying to shape and a country where society was fundamentally
[Amit Varma]: illiberal and the way to change that was from the bottom up, as Gandhi said, and a top-down
[Amit Varma]: imposition simply wouldn't work. And I think that's kind of been the big failing. And what
[Amit Varma]: I wonder, therefore, is that in a poor country, is there a precedent of society ever being
[Amit Varma]: liberal in the sense that we would, you know, mean the word, I mean, I'm just thinking aloud
[Amit Varma]: here. But my thing is that, you know, you can't expect shared values of liberalism in
[Amit Varma]: a country that is by and large, torn apart by scarcity and is as desperately poor as
[Amit Varma]: we are. But if the scarcity was less, if poverty was eliminated, for example, then shared interests
[Amit Varma]: could at least ensure a certain kind of liberal behaviour because the current order would
[Amit Varma]: then be working in your favour and you would not be needing an other or an enemy to blame
[Amit Varma]: for your woes or your troubles or whatever. And again, I'm just sort of thinking aloud
[Amit Varma]: that it's too much to lament that society doesn't share our values. I think, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there is this old saw about how the best foreign policy is economic growth. And it seems to
[Amit Varma]: me that if you want a more liberal society, also, economic growth has to kind of be the
[Amit Varma]: way forward towards that. And both India and Egypt, of course, failed miserably in the
[Amit Varma]: early years. And sadly, even with the change in dispensation today, you still have that
[Amit Varma]: same kind of status mindset, which sort of continues, you know, we had this golden 20
[Amit Varma]: year period between 1991 and 2011. And I've done episodes on this, which I'll link from
[Amit Varma]: the show notes. But again, you know, statism, top down thinking, all of it sort of continues
[Amit Varma]: with this added poison of hatred and bigotry. What would your reaction be to that? Like
[Amit Varma]: how important would something like a flourishing economy be towards bringing about a liberal
[Amit Varma]: society? And obviously, it would not be the case that a flourishing economy will give
[Amit Varma]: you a liberal society, not at all. There are enough counter examples. But would you agree
[Amit Varma]: that it might be a necessary but not sufficient condition?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think absolutely. You know, I mean, it helps to create a kind of virtuous circle,
[Guest]: having a better economy, more, you know, better horizons for people, better prospects, you
[Guest]: know, a better sort of future, a more positive view of the future, things will get better,
[Guest]: you know, that keeping that sustained over time, definitely creates a, you know, a sort
[Guest]: of virtuous circle. But simply being prosperous doesn't do that doesn't cut the ice. I mean,
[Guest]: look at the United States these days, rich, rich country don't get richer, but so polarized
[Guest]: and actually rather violent. And, you know, liberalism is besieged and not in great shape
[Guest]: in the US, you know, for a variety of reasons. But, you know, that's a kind of fairly easy
[Guest]: thing to hold up and say, it doesn't work, that doesn't necessarily work. But, you know,
[Guest]: absolutely prosperity helps. I mean, timing is also useful. I mean, you know, countries
[Guest]: that became prosperous during a time of peace, and there's a kind of, you know, there's a
[Guest]: lot of European countries, there was a sort of organic change that happened from the 1950s,
[Guest]: 1960s, a place like Italy just kind of rose, you know, to become a fairly, or Spain, a
[Guest]: very good example, you know, it's now a very liberal, you know, kind of society, but it
[Guest]: was previously under fascist government, you know, until the 1970s. And prosperity certainly
[Guest]: helped pave the way towards something else. But there was also in Europe, the big difference
[Guest]: there is there's also the power of example, I mean, you know, and also the power of experience,
[Guest]: you know, I mean, a lot of those countries went through pretty terrible wars, I mean,
[Guest]: you know, and they kind of shocked into knowing what to avoid. And, you know, that's one of
[Guest]: the things that, you know, being a sort of European type person in India today, you see
[Guest]: a lot of the things that the mistakes that were made in Europe before that you see them
[Guest]: happening here now. And one has a kind of historical memory of that, that I think a
[Guest]: lot of Indians don't have and may not recognize the same symptoms. So, yeah, and, you know,
[Guest]: everyone is under threat everywhere in the world right now, actually. So, I think we
[Guest]: may be, you know, we're in for a rough time everywhere the next few decades. There has
[Guest]: been this, you know, as you say, the arc of history has looked like we're all heading
[Guest]: to a kinder place. And that's certainly held true or has held true for, you know, the last
[Guest]: several centuries, broadly speaking, with few minor interruptions, holocausts now and
[Guest]: then very unfortunate events of one kind or another. But broadly speaking, we are in a,
[Guest]: you know, more humane zone now than we were before. And that even that that's still true
[Guest]: in many ways. I mean, you know, for example, when one sees in India, the last few months,
[Guest]: there have been a lot of very unfortunate kind of communal riots, and it's gotten people
[Guest]: on edge. And I've heard a lot of friends who are very despairing. And I wasn't in India
[Guest]: 20 years ago. But I mean, you know, India's seen darker things, frankly, actually. I mean,
[Guest]: so, you know, and the fact that we're all, you know, on edge about incidents that so
[Guest]: far have caused really relatively little loss of life. I mean, one hates to put these things
[Guest]: in kind of, you know, you know, metrics like that. But, you know, it's not so long ago
[Guest]: when there were riots in India's capital where 4000 people were killed, you know, I mean,
[Guest]: so we're not there right now, which is a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: So my next question is, again, about something which, you know, so much of your book about
[Amit Varma]: Cairo, I'd read a part, and I'd say that, hey, this is just like India, like, what is
[Amit Varma]: this about, you know, long before coming to India, Max has written a book about India.
[Amit Varma]: And part of that is, you know, one part that struck me was about, A, the general apathy
[Amit Varma]: of the people towards governance, and B, then that phenomenon of society stepping in to
[Amit Varma]: fill the gaps led by government. And there's a really nice sort of historical account where
[Amit Varma]: you talk of, you know, what happened in Egypt in 1065-72, those seven years when there was
[Amit Varma]: a seven year dearth, as it were, where you wrote quote, and I'll tell you, and it'll
[Amit Varma]: be obvious to the listener why it's sort of relevant where you write, the Nile's capriciousness
[Amit Varma]: was indiscriminate. However, the Fatimid Caliph himself suffered from the calamitous seven
[Amit Varma]: year dearth of 1065-72. In those years, the city succumbed to panic. Bread, say the chronicles,
[Amit Varma]: was auctioned at an unbelievable 12 dinars a loaf, a price so far beyond the reach of
[Amit Varma]: the poor that some were said to have resorted to fitting meat hooks to ropes, so as to fish
[Amit Varma]: unlucky pedestrians off the street and eat them. The historian Al-Makrizi says the Caliph
[Amit Varma]: Al-Musansir was forced to sell precious objects, furniture, horses, arms, and eventually all
[Amit Varma]: the movable contents of his palace. When he was reduced at last to squatting on a mat
[Amit Varma]: on the floor of his throne room and living of charity, the women of his court fled. The
[Amit Varma]: Shiite princes set off for the rival Abbasid city of Baghdad, their hair dishevelled, howling
[Amit Varma]: with hunger, only to fall outside the walls of Cairo and die of starvation. Al-Musansir's
[Amit Varma]: humiliation now touched bottom. The Caliph was forced to pawn ornaments from the tombs
[Amit Varma]: of his ancestors. And then you continue, Al-Musansir's possessions cannot have brought in very much.
[Amit Varma]: Al-Makrizi, who as a Sunni cleric admittedly had it in for Egypt's former Shiite masters,
[Amit Varma]: tells us that at the height of the famine, a wealthy widow pawned a necklace that had
[Amit Varma]: cost a thousand dinars. All it fetched was a sack of flour. The unlucky lady hired guards
[Amit Varma]: to defend her pathetic prize. But even so, a mob attacked them outside the city gates
[Amit Varma]: and relieved her of all but a fistful. This she made into a biscuit, which she carried
[Amit Varma]: to the door of the Caliph's palace. People of Cairo, she shouted to the crowd that gathered.
[Amit Varma]: Blessings on our master, Al-Musansir. Providence has proven the goodness of his rule since
[Amit Varma]: I have bought this biscuit for thousand dinars. The poor lady's scarring sarcasm and her tone
[Amit Varma]: is still typical of Cairian protests was to no avail. There was no uprising. The Caliph
[Amit Varma]: rescued by the arrival of his army from Syria went on to rule for another 25 years, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote, which indicates that, you know, the lack of accountability in terms of governance
[Amit Varma]: from like way back when. And then you sort of talk about the modern apathy and you write
[Amit Varma]: quote garbage provides an instructive example. Visitors often wonder why Cairo is so dirty.
[Amit Varma]: Some say the length of Egypt's history has so varied its people that they don't see the
[Amit Varma]: point in removing detritus when it will only reappear, stop quote. And then you have this
[Amit Varma]: long section on how, you know, private collectors called the Zabalin eventually take care of
[Amit Varma]: the garbage. And, you know, an industry runs into an industry forms where you have thousands
[Amit Varma]: of little workshops are using these recycled raw materials and making plastic flip flops,
[Amit Varma]: car parts, television antennae, you know, you write about how discarded clothes become
[Amit Varma]: multicolored rag rugs and so on. And so there's an incredible amount of innovation within
[Amit Varma]: society itself. And it is stepping into these gaps. And it seems like the state and the
[Amit Varma]: society are on two kind of parallel tracks that, you know, to use sort of James Buchanan's
[Amit Varma]: formulation, you know, the state can either be, you know, productive and protective or
[Amit Varma]: it can be predatory. And here this state is just predatory. And it's, you know, and society
[Amit Varma]: functions despite the state. And it seems identical in India. So my question to you
[Amit Varma]: is everything that I quoted you wrote in 1998, or your book was published then, has it changed?
[Amit Varma]: Is there hope? Because what can often happen is that you can just get into this trap, where
[Amit Varma]: we become apathetic about governance, and we don't demand more from our rulers, as it
[Amit Varma]: were, you know, technically, they should, the state should serve us, but they rule us.
[Amit Varma]: And we are subjects and not citizens. So, you know, we just become apathetic, we stop
[Amit Varma]: demanding and we kind of work within the gaps. So how is it in Cairo today, for example,
[Amit Varma]: and is there anywhere in the world from your studies where, you know, that a positive direction
[Amit Varma]: and a movement in a positive direction is possible?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think this distinction you make between subjects and citizens is very important and
[Guest]: very significant. It does really define a lot of different countries, actually, and
[Guest]: it's absolutely true of Egypt. And unfortunately, it has not changed. And I think one of the
[Guest]: things that's slightly different about India is that it's generally true subjects and citizens,
[Guest]: but there's, I think there's an elite in India who are actually citizens. But you have to
[Guest]: belong to that elite to be a proper citizen. You know, there's kind of levels of citizenship
[Guest]: in India. It's a more open democratic country. Egypt's truly closed. I mean, you, the number
[Guest]: of people who are actual sort of citizens is rather small. Almost everyone is a subject.
[Guest]: It's very capricious. But, you know, one of the things that often struck me about a place
[Guest]: like Egypt and India is not dissimilar is that these are, you know, some of the, what
[Guest]: we consider to be norms of, you know, politics and citizenship and so on and so forth, are
[Guest]: actually largely based on, you know, Western countries and their, the Enlightenment, post-Enlightenment
[Guest]: kind of creations of, you know, Western societies, including all of their ghastly wars and, you
[Guest]: know, colonization, all that stuff, who now have citizens that enjoy a fair amount of
[Guest]: both freedom and actual personal responsibility and so on. And where the word citizen and
[Guest]: citizenship actually, you know, has some, carries some strong meaning. But those are
[Guest]: the exceptions. You know, those kinds of countries are the exceptions. Places like Egypt or India
[Guest]: are much more normal in the world, I think. And also, you know, they have a longer historical
[Guest]: experience. And I've always found that people in Egypt, who I know a bit better, and I'm
[Guest]: sure it's exactly the same in India, are actually extremely rational actors. And if they don't
[Guest]: expect much from government, they have little reason to expect much from government. And,
[Guest]: you know, of course, it becomes a self-reinforcing cycle, so you don't expect much, so you don't
[Guest]: demand much. And that's not a good thing. Actually, it's better to be a demanding, whiny,
[Guest]: you know, annoying citizen or annoying part of the society, and then you might affect
[Guest]: change. But if it's in your historical experience, and this is absolutely the case in Egypt,
[Guest]: that protest doesn't work, then, you know, that's for a good reason. And unfortunately,
[Guest]: I mean, some, an experience that I've lived through very, very closely, you know, day
[Guest]: by day, which was the Arab Spring, 2011, when Egyptians rose up and overthrew their president.
[Guest]: Well, that's one of the very few occasions in, you know, hundreds of years, millennia.
[Guest]: You know, there often have been many uprisings, as for example, when this charming lady stood
[Guest]: up in front of the caliph, you know, a thousand years ago, and, you know, insulted him for
[Guest]: making a biscuit cost so much. But, you know, in the uprising in Cairo, 2011, millions of
[Guest]: people in the street, and they did succeed in toppling the president, but they did not
[Guest]: topple the system. And the system came back, has come back, with a vengeance, and reinstated,
[Guest]: you know, very much the same order of things, in which you are not really a Pakistan citizen,
[Guest]: you know, you are the subject of us, the generals. And that's just how it is, and how it will
[Guest]: remain. So, unfortunately, you know, being in the middle of that uprising was a thrilling
[Guest]: thing because it's a lot of people of my generation, and a lot of the best talent in Egypt, and
[Guest]: the people with the most, you know, imagination, most biggest dreams, the, you know, people
[Guest]: who really burn to do something better for their country, to see a better future. They're
[Guest]: the ones whose illusions were smashed the most thoroughly. And it was just such a completely
[Guest]: depressing moment to see them sort of smacked down and pushed back into having to accept
[Guest]: that they, you know, are going to be run by a bunch of guys in uniform. As has been the
[Guest]: case for most of the 5,000 years of Egypt's history, you know. So, these lessons are real,
[Guest]: you know. If people are skeptical about the capacity to effect change, it's for a historically
[Guest]: earned reason, and that's particularly true in Egypt. India's a little bit different.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, India has been a functioning democracy to its great, great, great credit
[Guest]: for several generations now. You know, there's been change again, and again, and again. But
[Guest]: I'm afraid that even so, when you go out to your very average, you know, working folks,
[Guest]: you know, in a small rural town, they don't hold up immense hope for big change, you know,
[Guest]: incremental change. And a lot of the sort of voting pattern is about what's good for
[Guest]: me, you know, in a very transactional way. And that is absolutely logical and reasonable
[Guest]: way to look at things.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and you know, the two deeper problems, like I often say that India has really three
[Amit Varma]: problems the way I see it right now. And the first problem is subjective, and it's a proximate
[Amit Varma]: problem. And it reflects my feelings, which where I feel the party in power is a problem,
[Amit Varma]: obviously. But the two deeper problems, which have nothing to do with the party in power,
[Amit Varma]: are number one, the oppressive state, which is the system of government that we have,
[Amit Varma]: which is designed to rule and not to serve, and therefore, by default turns us into subjects
[Amit Varma]: and not citizens. And it's, you know, really, you know, adapted from the colonial state
[Amit Varma]: in that sense. That's number one. And number two is society itself, the way that it is
[Amit Varma]: and what we discussed. And these seem to be almost insurmountable problems in different
[Amit Varma]: ways. Now, even if let us say that we have, you know, a change in dispensation and economic
[Amit Varma]: growth and gradually, you know, let's say, over some span of time, no matter how long
[Amit Varma]: poverty disappears, incentives change, people have less incentive to discriminate or to
[Amit Varma]: hate each other or whatever. And we enter this virtuous cycle of positive sum games.
[Amit Varma]: Even in that kind of best case scenario, which would take decades, you can do something about
[Amit Varma]: society, perhaps societies can become more liberal on certain margins we already have,
[Amit Varma]: like, you know, 377, the law against gay sex being abolished, you know, had that happened
[Amit Varma]: 20 years ago, you know, it would not have been greeted with so much applause and relief
[Amit Varma]: as it now has been. So on some margins, we've done better, but on some margins, we haven't.
[Amit Varma]: But I don't know what can really be done about this incredibly oppressive state with a stop
[Amit Varma]: down way of functioning, like, there's a beautiful passage again about Cairo, but again, you
[Amit Varma]: know, reminded me of how India used to be. And, you know, fundamentally, it remains like
[Amit Varma]: this in principle, though not to this extreme. And you're right, quote, after 5000 years
[Amit Varma]: of civilization, Egypt's political system remains pyramid shaped. Cairo sits indomitably
[Amit Varma]: at the pinnacle. Its Ministry of Irrigation decides which farmer gets how much water for
[Amit Varma]: its crops. Its Ministry of Religious Affairs chooses who is to deliver sermons in which
[Amit Varma]: mosques and what they are to say. Its Ministry of the Interior picks the mayors for all Egypt's
[Amit Varma]: 4000 villages. The president who resides there appoints a governor of all 26 provinces and
[Amit Varma]: the heads of all 12 national universities, four of which naturally are in Cairo. Until
[Amit Varma]: the last century, all farmland in Egypt belonged in theory to the country's rulers. The lion's
[Amit Varma]: share of profit from the world's richest land was sucked into the capital. Even today, the
[Amit Varma]: farmland is nearly all privately owned. The state retains title to the 96% of Egypt, which
[Amit Varma]: is desert, stop quote. And this centralizing impulse is something that kind of remains
[Amit Varma]: in India. There's no way for it to go. Obviously, we should be a far more federal society government
[Amit Varma]: should be as local as possible. I've had many episodes talking about, you know, why this
[Amit Varma]: is the why things are the way they are and lamenting why it's unlikely to do anything
[Amit Varma]: about it simply because of incentives. So people who can change the system benefit from
[Amit Varma]: it way too much for it to ever be rational for it to change. So now again, when we talk
[Amit Varma]: about the state, what are your thoughts? Like, you know, is it better in Egypt since the
[Amit Varma]: 24 years that your book came out? And do you see progress being possible in the right direction?
[Amit Varma]: Has it happened anywhere that a state has voluntarily given up control?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think it has. I think before answering the rest of your question, there's just a
[Guest]: little historical point that I think is interesting because it's relevant to both Egypt and India.
[Guest]: You know, of course, we can blame a lot on the Raj and you know, we can say that the
[Guest]: Indian government as it is now is very much inherited from the Raj with the same sees
[Guest]: itself playing the same role in a peculiar way. But I think it was something that people
[Guest]: often skip over is that, you know, places like Egypt and India both attained gained
[Guest]: their sort of, you know, full mastery of themselves right after World War Two. But during World
[Guest]: War Two, the British in both countries had imposed draconian rule, you know, it was a
[Guest]: particularly heavy kind of rule. This is why you have sedition laws. This is why you have
[Guest]: a lot of these laws are actually put in place for running a country in wartime, you know,
[Guest]: and there wasn't enough time after the war to undo them. You know, in a place like Britain,
[Guest]: they all got undone eventually, and you get to the 1950s and 60s, and it becomes a happy
[Guest]: liberal country. But a place like Egypt and India, they're still frozen in many ways legally
[Guest]: in World War Two, which is a rather, I mean, you look at it that way, that's one of the
[Guest]: reasons why you have such overweening states. They've got wartime powers, you know, effectively
[Guest]: what would be wartime powers in a normal country. And of course, they don't want to let them
[Guest]: go, you know. And I think, you know, there are countries that have broken out of having
[Guest]: such an overweening state that is often disdainful of its own people. You know, it's useful to
[Guest]: have countervailing institutions. In Egypt, those have now been broken and really hardly
[Guest]: exist anymore. And it's even more so now than it was at the time of Mubarak, who was overthrown
[Guest]: in the Arab Spring in 2011. I mean, there is no independent judiciary, there is hardly
[Guest]: any independent press, these things just don't exist. In India, I think the judiciary is
[Guest]: particularly important and capable of having an influence and changing the shape of things,
[Guest]: but it doesn't do so. And I think the main reason for that is that the way that it's
[Guest]: shaped the courts and justice system in India is it's become a sort of corporate institution,
[Guest]: which is its primary function is to look after its own people and to replicate itself, you
[Guest]: know, to get more people like itself into positions as judges and so on. And in Egypt,
[Guest]: it's actually quite rather similar. You know, in fact, the legal profession is all dominated
[Guest]: by sons of judges, daughters of judges, who end up being judges. And, you know, it's kind
[Guest]: of, it's a cycle. And this ends up being kind of class of people that run that. And they
[Guest]: present no challenge to the state because they get what they want out of it. They've
[Guest]: got their, you know, retirement benefits and their villas and their etc, etc. So, you know,
[Guest]: you need slightly independent institutions to challenge the centrality of the state.
[Guest]: But you know, I think there are countries that have moved away from similar overweening
[Guest]: states, many countries that have broken free of different degrees of fascism. Some countries
[Guest]: have broken free to some extent and then fallen back into it. I think of Turkey, for example,
[Guest]: another country I know very well. You know, Turkey has gone in and out of sort of slightly
[Guest]: liberal phases, and then the military has come in and clamped down. So then it's faded
[Guest]: out again. And for example, Erdogan, when he first came into power, this is in 2002,
[Guest]: the current Turkish president, he's now in his 20th year in power. When he first came
[Guest]: in, he was celebrated by liberals because he took down the generals and put them back
[Guest]: in their box and put them in their places, instituted a lot of freedoms. And then over
[Guest]: the next 20 years, he proceeded to take them all away again, you know, so it can kind of
[Guest]: go one way or another. And, you know, poor Turkey finds itself back to where it was,
[Guest]: you know, decades ago in terms of personal freedom and political freedom. But other countries
[Guest]: have successfully, you know, there have been waves of things like that. You know, if you're
[Guest]: old enough to be around, you know, you can remember waves of when the countries of Southern
[Guest]: Europe were largely fascist dictatorships. There was a fascist dictatorship in Greece,
[Guest]: there was one in Spain, there was one in Portugal. They all felt like nine pins in the space
[Guest]: of a few years. Needless to say, Latin America is another place, which used to be almost
[Guest]: entirely military dictatorships. And in the space of another single decade, like the 1980s,
[Guest]: they were all knocked down and changed into something else. You know, I'm not advocating
[Guest]: for revolution in a place like India. I don't think India needs a revolution of that kind.
[Guest]: But you know, these things can change their shape. And, you know, I think there's a, it's
[Guest]: possible that India will kind of naturally change a little bit because, you know, some
[Guest]: of the processes that India is now undergoing that are painful and difficult, you know,
[Guest]: and as you say, they're even from the spectrum of sort of liberal, you know, reform. Good
[Guest]: things happen in India right now. You know, it's not all the dark picture at all. As you
[Guest]: say, you know, rights for gay people, this has been hugely changed, fundamentally changed
[Guest]: people's lives for the better, I think, you know, millions of people in India. But, you
[Guest]: know, I think some of the, you know, the relation between people in the state that becomes disembodied
[Guest]: partly is the fact that people don't pay taxes. Your average person pays GST and some sales
[Guest]: taxes here and then, but isn't actually taxed. In fact, gets a lot of freebies out of the
[Guest]: government. So you create a relationship between the state and government that's not actually
[Guest]: a very healthy one. You as a citizen are not paying taxes, actually. I mean, the middle
[Guest]: class pays taxes and actually demands something from the state. And these are when I say there
[Guest]: are different categories of citizens. You know, taxpaying Indian citizens do demand
[Guest]: stuff and often do get it, actually. But the proportion of taxpaying people in India is
[Guest]: rather small and therefore they have nothing to demand back. And actually that's true in
[Guest]: Egypt as well. You know, the government gets most of its revenue from other stuff. It gets
[Guest]: its revenue from, you know, oil, from the Suez Canal, from what they call rents, rather
[Guest]: than from income tax. So, you know, whereas in most, you know, slightly democracies that
[Guest]: function with a higher degree of citizenship, there's more of an economic relationship of
[Guest]: interdependence between the state and its people. You know, you as an American person,
[Guest]: you pay taxes and God damn it, you then demand, you know, what you deserve back from the government
[Guest]: for what you paid. And if you don't get what you like, you refuse to pay taxes, you know.
[Guest]: So that's been going on since the American War of Independence, which was, it was all
[Guest]: about taxes on, you know. So that's an old, old story. But I think that's one realm where
[Guest]: India as it becomes more formalized, the economy becomes more formalized, which is a painful
[Guest]: process and it's being pushed hard by the current government. And, you know, it's probably,
[Guest]: you know, the future will be more like that. It's very painful for a lot of people in India
[Guest]: that have lived, you know, forever in the so-called informal economy. But it's probably
[Guest]: an inevitable direction. But ultimately, it might end up with a more balance between,
[Guest]: you know, those who are paying the government and demanding its services at the same time.
[Guest]: That's a convoluted and long-term kind of change. But that's the sort of, you know,
[Guest]: incremental change that might actually, you know, improve the quality of citizenship in
[Guest]: a place like India, and which has happened in other places.
[Amit Varma]: I'll push back a little bit on the taxes thing in the sense that I think every Indian pays
[Amit Varma]: taxes. Now the indirect taxes do actually amount to a lot in a poor person's life. I
[Amit Varma]: mean, inflation is a tax on the poor, basically. So the poor are being taxed in ways that might
[Amit Varma]: be unseen to them. But I would not for a moment say that no one pays taxes because, you know,
[Amit Varma]: just the ripple effect of high fuel prices, for example, is kind of huge.
[Guest]: Yeah, I don't disagree with you a bit. But I mean, you don't pay taxes in a context of
[Guest]: here's your, you know, I'm sending you my check at the end of the year for your percentage
[Guest]: of my, you know what I mean? It's slightly different than just being sucked dry by fuel
[Guest]: prices day after day, when you don't have, you know, there's no exchange, if you see
[Guest]: what I mean, it's a one way, you know, process.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's unseen and normalized. So after you wrote your book, what happened then? Like,
[Amit Varma]: at that point, what is your conception of yourself? You're a few years into a career
[Amit Varma]: in journalism, where were you working at that time? And, you know, now you've written a
[Amit Varma]: book, do you think of yourself as an author, you're going to write more books? Or are you
[Amit Varma]: just what a relief, it's over now I'm back to journalism. Tell me a little bit more about
[Amit Varma]: that. And then how eventually you got to be, you know, the head of the Middle East Bureau
[Amit Varma]: for The Economist.
[Guest]: Well, you know, it's kind of strange, these changes in your life often happen in a big,
[Guest]: big lump. So, you know, when it rains, it pours. So, my book came out in, I think, 1998.
[Guest]: And then in very, very quick succession, you know, my wife and I, we had our first child,
[Guest]: so suddenly I'm a father, more responsibility. And very soon after that, I actually got offered
[Guest]: a job by The Economist as a proper, you know, pocket job with a proper salary, budget, travel
[Guest]: budget. And they offered me a job, I've been writing for them as a stringer, and actually
[Guest]: what they call a sort of super stringer, I was actually on a, you know, not a full salary,
[Guest]: but kind of, what do you call it, a stipend. Yeah, sort of salary, monthly stipend for
[Guest]: several years. And they just took me on staff. So, this all happened in a very short space
[Guest]: of time. So, Cairo came out, the book came out, child, and offer of a proper job. So,
[Guest]: it was kind of a no-brainer to get a proper job that would pay for, you know, bringing up my
[Guest]: child. And it was also a very nice job because I was made Middle East bureau chief. You know,
[Guest]: and suddenly I was offered a job with all the goodies, with a travel budget and so on,
[Guest]: and given a big geographical space. So, I was suddenly covering 22 countries. And for some
[Guest]: time I was doing it, you know, we have other stringers and various other people, but the
[Guest]: economist was very understaffed in the Middle East. And so, I had to, you know, I spent then
[Guest]: from 2000 until 2015, I kept that job, but I had, you know, 22 countries to travel and
[Guest]: really went the length back and forth from Morocco to Iran, dozens of times, you know,
[Guest]: spent a lot of time in places like Saudi Arabia, Lebanon, Syria, Iraq, you know, and covered,
[Guest]: you know, really major events after 9-11, of course, and then the invasion of Iraq,
[Guest]: uprisings all over the place, Iranian politics, you know, Algeria, and then eventually the whole
[Guest]: Arab Spring business, which went on and on and on. And that was just a colossal story. I was
[Guest]: actually, the Arab Spring erupted in 2011. By 2010, I'd had this job as Middle East bureau
[Guest]: chief, which was fascinating and great for 10 years. And I was just beginning to feel like,
[Guest]: got to move on, do something else. It's tiring. And then this huge story breaks up where the whole
[Guest]: region erupts in one giant revolution. And of course, I couldn't, you know, abandon ship right
[Guest]: at that point. And you saw it coming, right? I saw it coming in Egypt. I mean, you know, I have to
[Guest]: just, you know, briefly wave my little flag for a moment. I mean, I was one of the very few people
[Guest]: who actually wrote an article saying something about to happen. I mean, we actually had a cover
[Guest]: story in June of 2010, with a rather nice cover. It was a picture of Egyptian President Mubarak as
[Guest]: a kind of Pharaoh sinking in the sand. And it was just saying that something's about to happen. This
[Guest]: younger generation is not going to put up with more of this stuff. And I can see the mood in
[Guest]: Egypt is ready for some, without being very specific, some major change. And that did prove
[Guest]: to be totally prescient. Although no one could have predicted the way things actually worked out.
[Guest]: But it was clear to, you know, having been around the Arab world for the previous 10 years,
[Guest]: people were just so fed up with these, you know, reptilian old farts who are running the
[Guest]: whole region. And, you know, they were all ripe to be overthrown.
[Amit Varma]: These were incredible times to cover the Middle East because so much was happening.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of the coverage that one sees from elsewhere is sort of very basic or
[Amit Varma]: very kind of simplistic. Like this is excellent sort of, again, one of your essays in NYRB,
[Amit Varma]: where you wrote about the indifference to when Bin Laden died. And, you know, reading it now,
[Amit Varma]: it was sort of a revelation to me what you kind of wrote about, because I didn't have any sense
[Amit Varma]: of this from the media at the time. And what you wrote was, quote, long before the choppers dropped
[Amit Varma]: into Abbottabad, Osama Bin Laden himself had faded from relevance. His messages to the world had
[Amit Varma]: grown fewer and increasingly divorced from the concerns of ordinary Muslims. The last audio tape
[Amit Varma]: attributed to him, released in November, singled out France for attack because of his strictures
[Amit Varma]: in the veil. Earlier last year, he had blamed the West for global warming, blasted Pakistan's
[Amit Varma]: efforts at relief following deadly floods, and railed against cartoons depicting the Prophet
[Amit Varma]: Mohammed, five years after the images first provoked Muslim protest. Few bothered to listen
[Amit Varma]: to such predictable bluster. Bin Laden's words fail to rate highly even in the jihadist's own
[Amit Varma]: patch of cyberspace, which tends to be dominated by techie talk on weapons and tactics, or equally
[Amit Varma]: arcane exegesis of musty Islamic texts. And then you sort of continue to write, later you write,
[Amit Varma]: 10 years later, such heroic posturing looks rather dated to a younger Arab generation that
[Amit Varma]: in places like Tunis, Cairo, Muscat, and even Riyadh, is highly urbanized, increasingly
[Amit Varma]: sophisticated about the ways of the world, and impatient for gains in the here and now."
[Amit Varma]: And this reminded me of something I read in a local context about Kashmir, where the author
[Amit Varma]: David Devdas has a book called The Generation of Rage in Kashmir, and his central thesis is that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, by the middle of the aughties, there was this new generation of young people in Kashmir,
[Amit Varma]: who were beginning to, you know, not care about the fissures of the past, they were aspirational,
[Amit Varma]: they wanted to be part of the mainstream, they wanted to be engineers and entrepreneurs and
[Amit Varma]: all of those things. And yet, you know, a brutal state used to rent seeking, used to being predatory,
[Amit Varma]: didn't allow them to do that. And the violence from the state continued. And eventually, you
[Amit Varma]: know, Kashmir descended back into hell. And that seems to me such an incredibly great tragedy. And
[Amit Varma]: I'll link the book from the show notes, you should all read it. And so, you know, and in India,
[Amit Varma]: certainly, that was sort of an opportunity lost. But give me a sense of, you know, where the Middle
[Amit Varma]: East is today, because I have heard from friends who live and work in the UAE, including for the
[Amit Varma]: government who sort of have dealings with Saudi Arabia, for example, that they're all conscious
[Amit Varma]: of sort of changing with the time. So one, of course, has reason to be skeptical about Saudi
[Amit Varma]: Arabia in that context. But there is that sense that look, the oil bonanza won't last forever,
[Amit Varma]: and what comes after it, and all of that. So it's easy to sort of, you know, give into simplistic
[Amit Varma]: narratives of one type or the other. But give me a deeper sense of what's kind of happening in
[Amit Varma]: society there. And I would assume that whatever this state is, the state is lagging behind
[Guest]: society. So kind of give me a sense of that. Well, you know, I think, like in the rest of
[Guest]: the world, maybe the key word is fragmentation. You know, I mean, there's always much more variety
[Guest]: from one country to another in the Middle East than is given credit. It is sort of lumped together
[Guest]: as one space. You know, West Asia is how it's seen from this perspective sometimes. And of course,
[Guest]: the Gulf is radically different from other parts of the Middle East. You know, the Middle East
[Guest]: contains Yemen, one of the poorest countries in the world. And, you know, places like Qatar,
[Guest]: the richest country on the planet. So there's a tremendous variety there. But fragmentation is the
[Guest]: key, I think. And the societal changes that are extremely important. Of course, what's happening
[Guest]: in Saudi Arabia is very, very important. Because Saudi Arabia was the kind of, in some ways, you
[Guest]: know, justifiably sometimes over exaggerated, was sort of heart of darkness. You know, that's where
[Guest]: there was a sort of, you know, the most, you know, to use crude terminology, sort of backwards
[Guest]: version of Islam was given money and respectability and power. And largely in a really creepy bargain
[Guest]: between the ruling family and the, you know, the clergy was just basically, as one top prince once
[Guest]: directly told me, he said, we're buying an insurance policy, you know, quite straightforward.
[Guest]: So they just threw money at the most radical loonies for years. And so Saudi Arabia in that
[Guest]: guise was a real danger to, a menace to the world, actually, you know. And, you know, the outcome was
[Guest]: people like Bin Laden, you know, that's where they came from. So under the current king, who has,
[Guest]: you know, obviously goes without saying, I, you know, I was a personal friend of one of his well
[Guest]: known victims, you know, has his dark side. But the things that he's changed in Saudi society are
[Guest]: quite extraordinary. I mean, you know, he's wrenched Saudi society towards something quite
[Guest]: different, radically different. I mean, much more in tune with where a lot of Saudis already were,
[Guest]: by the way, you know, it's not like they're kicking and screaming. A lot of urban Saudi
[Guest]: youth were already in a zone that was much closer to, you know, MTV and the world of global internet
[Guest]: and Netflix or whatever, you know, then to what was going on officially in Saudi Arabia. So that
[Guest]: change in Saudi Arabia where you have, you know, raves going on until six in the morning in Riyadh
[Guest]: with thousands of people attending, sponsored by the government. This is a Saudi Arabia that's
[Guest]: radically different and will have a big impact because they had a sort of radiating impact
[Guest]: across the region. But fragmentation elsewhere and uncertainty, you know, what's the sort of
[Guest]: what's next and kind of divorce from politics. And there's also at the same time in the Middle
[Guest]: East, there's a kind of collapse of the old system. There was some kind of a very tiresome,
[Guest]: stupid old order, which existed before the Arab Spring with these annual meetings of Arab summit
[Guest]: meetings, a bunch of dictators get together and sort of jamboree, you know, there was sort of
[Guest]: tired hackneyed themes of Arab unity and this and that. And all of this is just gone, you know,
[Guest]: it's finished. And each country is looking after its own in itself now. So it's as a region much
[Guest]: more fragmented. And I think society is more fragmented and politics more fragmented. It's
[Guest]: not a very happy region right now. They've just come through this trauma, the whole Arab Spring,
[Guest]: which ended being crushed everywhere, you know, these tremendous hopes raised all over the region,
[Guest]: and then absolutely dashed and crushed. It was, you know, terrible roller coaster and has left
[Guest]: a whole generation just kind of exhausted, emotionally exhausted and just wiped out
[Guest]: and created a whole bunch of exiles and left a lot of people dead also, needless to say,
[Guest]: and a lot of countries shattered. I mean, a place like Syria, I don't know, you know, how long,
[Guest]: how many generations, what it will take to bring back Syria to the world. So it's not a pretty
[Guest]: picture. I mean, that's the long and short of it. And what's also strange is how little changes,
[Guest]: we've all known that the oil is running out in the Gulf forever. And yet, you know, something
[Guest]: like Ukraine happens, the price of oil goes back up. And all those guys are back in business big
[Guest]: time, you know, making a lot of money out of the world oil price. So I remember often being told by
[Guest]: oil people in places like Saudi Arabia, they would say, you know, our money isn't running out
[Guest]: anytime soon and actually mark my words, and they turn out to be right. So let's kind of come to
[Amit Varma]: India now. But before we come to India, just some questions about the economies that one would ask
[Amit Varma]: that is it is it that one tends to ask that is it an issue, for example, that there are no bylines,
[Amit Varma]: you know, that there is a particular uniform style that you're supposed to have. So, you know,
[Amit Varma]: is that something that takes adjusting to, you know, how does that kind of work?
[Guest]: Well, again, I go back to my old oozing method, I kind of oozed into the economist, you know,
[Guest]: I started writing it for such a long time ago, that no one ever edited my stuff for economist
[Guest]: style ever, ever. I mean, there is an economist style book, but it's mostly about little things
[Guest]: like don't use this word, don't use that, put your comma here, it's, you know, there's nothing.
[Guest]: And so it's a style that just kind of takes, it creates itself in a way by format, by, you know,
[Guest]: having particular lengths of articles where you have to get a certain amount of information across,
[Guest]: and, you know, a certain audience that you're trying to reach, they're pretty well educated,
[Guest]: so you're not going to dumb it down too much. So that's what drives the style, you know,
[Guest]: and it's true that a lot of, you know, top economist writers and editors all gone to the
[Guest]: same, you know, the same public school and the same Oxford College, that's not untrue. But it
[Guest]: isn't a house style and it isn't drummed into people at all, it just kind of, you know, percolates
[Guest]: and happens. And as for anonymity, yeah, it's difficult and it depends who you are. And I've
[Guest]: known people who've joined the economist and then unjoined, moved on to other things precisely
[Guest]: because of the lack of a byline. You know, people are ambitious, personally ambitious,
[Guest]: but there's advantages and disadvantages always. I mean, you could, you know, having no byline
[Guest]: means you could sort of hide behind the institution. But it also means that, like,
[Guest]: for example, being an economist correspondent, you often get quite good access. You know,
[Guest]: and when I had to cover a lot of different countries, I found I get good access in a lot
[Guest]: of different places, and I didn't have to have a personal reputation. I was there because I got
[Guest]: good access because I was representing a respectable institution, you know, that people
[Guest]: wanted to talk to. So it definitely works both ways. Yeah, and I mean, it's a bit old fashioned,
[Guest]: and that is changing, of course, under the pressure of things like social media. So
[Guest]: nearly all of my colleagues now have some kind of social media, you know, kind of a shop window for
[Guest]: themselves of one kind. I'm actually very ancient and antediluvian and stupid by not pushing,
[Guest]: promoting, you know, my own stuff in The Economist, which I, you know, probably should do.
[Guest]: It just kind of goes against the grain somehow. But I think I belong to the, you know, donkey
[Guest]: class of transport, you know, in not doing more to push my own stuff on social media.
[Amit Varma]: So we're back to donkeys. No, but I mean, as long as your kinky non kinky book has your byline on
[Amit Varma]: it, I think you'll kind of be fine. What about what about the house point of view? Like when I
[Amit Varma]: like I used to read The Economist voraciously in the 90s and 2000s, and I found that I agreed with
[Amit Varma]: it on most things. But the thing is that the very fact that I agreed with it on most things shows
[Amit Varma]: that there is a particular house point of view, which is for, you know, free markets or free
[Amit Varma]: society, all of that. So is there sort of, has that ever changed? Has there kind of been pressure
[Amit Varma]: to sort of stick to that house point of view? Or is it in the selection process that you hire people
[Amit Varma]: who are like that? And has it changed with time? And especially in these times, where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: wokeness seems to be taking over newsrooms elsewhere, like in the New York Times, whose
[Amit Varma]: journalism has deteriorated sharply, in my view, you know, are there also all of these political
[Guest]: pressures that come in? Less than one would think. I mean, the political spectrum itself changes more
[Guest]: than The Economist changes. You know, I mean, I'm constantly surprised. It's happened to me many
[Guest]: times in India, people say, Oh, The Economist, why do you write for that leftist newspaper?
[Guest]: Or left? It's described as leftist. A lot of people think The Economist is a leftist magazine,
[Guest]: which is, you know, laughable to many people who were reading The Economist in the like the 90s,
[Guest]: and so on, so forth. And actually, The Economist has, you know, we've shifted a little bit,
[Guest]: certainly over time. But I mean, considering that The Economist was founded in 1843,
[Guest]: with basically, you know, the ideas of economic liberalism, free trade, you know, progress,
[Guest]: etc, etc. It's changed remarkably little, actually. And what you find is the political spectrum
[Guest]: changes around it. And we find ourselves sometimes a bit left of center, sometimes a bit right of
[Guest]: center. But the center point is what is moving, you know. And, but in my time with The Economist,
[Guest]: it's true in the 90s, partly because of Bill Clinton in the US, there's a tendency to be
[Guest]: slightly contrarian, you know, there was like a kind of annoyance with the comfort of the
[Guest]: Democrats in Washington in power under Bill Clinton. So The Economist went a little bit,
[Guest]: slightly to the right, as a counteraction to how comfortable the American, you know,
[Guest]: Democrats were in power, I think, and also as a counteraction to Labour Party Britain. So often,
[Guest]: I think, you know, The Economist is critical of whoever's in power. And so the position of the
[Guest]: paper can appear to be, you know, somewhere else on the spectrum, because we're being,
[Guest]: we're criticizing whoever's in power, you know, who comes from a left party or a right party.
[Guest]: So that does change things. But we did go, you know, there is argument inside The Economist.
[Guest]: And during the time that I've been there, you know, in my own opinion, we've done some really
[Guest]: stupid things. You know, like, you know, there was a big argument about the invasion of Iraq.
[Guest]: And I argued strong, I was Middle East, you know, Bureau Chief at the time, I argued strongly
[Guest]: against the American invasion of Iraq, I thought it was the most, you know, it was a bad idea in
[Guest]: so many ways, and had a big argument with our Editor-in-Chief. But I was basically overruled,
[Guest]: you know, I was one of the few people on the editorial, on the editorial side of the paper that
[Guest]: actually stood up, made some noise about that. Although it's interesting that when you actually
[Guest]: talk to other people, they agreed, they agreed that it was a bad idea, but didn't want to say
[Guest]: anything about it. So there's a lot of democracy inside The Economist. But in the end, decisions
[Guest]: about, you know, the political direction, it's a fairly small number of people, you know, fairly
[Guest]: senior editors who are making those decisions. After the kind of Iraq debacle, there was a little
[Guest]: bit of a change in direction for The Economist. And it went a little bit more to the left when
[Guest]: George Bush was in office, I think. And then, I think, during the Trump years, you know, under the
[Guest]: influence of Brexit, The Economist may have appeared to be left-wing, because it found it
[Guest]: impossible to agree with Trump on almost anything. And The Economist, on rational grounds, found
[Guest]: Brexit to be just plain stupid. So that's made it look sort of left-leaning, just because of those
[Guest]: larger issues. But I don't think that, you know, it's really actually changed that much.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And I think, like, certainly in India, like you mentioned, some people think of The
[Amit Varma]: Economist as a leftist magazine. And I think the whole spectrum of left and right simply doesn't
[Amit Varma]: work for India. I think it's become reflexive here, that if you speak against a regime in power,
[Amit Varma]: you are called a leftist. But the point is that if you look at the economic policies of the regime
[Amit Varma]: in power, they are leftist, they are identical to the previous status policies of the previous guys,
[Amit Varma]: right? You know, Modi, you know, Modi has kind of gone the way of Nehru's top-down thinking,
[Amit Varma]: borrowed the authoritarianism of Indira Gandhi, and, you know, certainly is kind of what maybe
[Amit Varma]: Sanjay Gandhi would have been had he kind of lived. So it's reflexive. And even in the context
[Amit Varma]: of Trump, like, you know, Trump actually went against almost every tenet of the Republican
[Amit Varma]: Party when he did what he did. So left and right doesn't really apply. You look at Trump's economic
[Amit Varma]: policies, and I mean, his aversion to free trade is almost identical to Bernie Sanders, you know,
[Amit Varma]: so to call an opponent of that leftist is completely absurd. So this whole left-right
[Amit Varma]: spectrum really doesn't work for me. And I wish more people like me would just look at, you know,
[Amit Varma]: who's on the side of freedom and who's not. And of course, you will find that nobody is on the
[Amit Varma]: side of freedom, but except, you know, a few of us. So and a little bit of trivia for my listeners,
[Amit Varma]: which again, I was a sort of TIL for me, where you point out that India's first ever budget speech
[Amit Varma]: was delivered by the gentleman who founded the Economist. You know, and I'll quote this bit
[Amit Varma]: where you write quote, this year also marks the 161st anniversary of India's first ever budget
[Amit Varma]: speech. It was delivered in 1860 in Calcutta, as Kolkata was then known by James Wilson,
[Amit Varma]: a Scottish businessman, banker and politician who 17 years earlier in London happened to have
[Amit Varma]: founded the Economist. The British colonial authorities had appointed him to restore order
[Amit Varma]: to their shambolic finances. The hard work took a toll. Just eight months after leaving, he died,
[Amit Varma]: as his tombstone in Kolkata explains, from the combined efforts of climate, anxiety and labor,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote. And I'm sort of struck by the fact that, you know, he founded the Economist and
[Guest]: India killed him. Which is sad. It is sad, but I mean, you know, frankly, the life expectancy of
[Guest]: most of those, you know, colonial officials at that time was very short, you know, I mean,
[Guest]: and he sounds like an amazing person. But to go back to what you were saying about left and right,
[Guest]: I think you're completely right. This terminology dates back to the French Revolution. It has
[Guest]: not much to do with the current reality. And I'm not sure how long, I mean, if it really ever had
[Guest]: much to do with India's real, you know, actual realities. You know, it's something that, you
[Guest]: know, that was replicated by the Communist Party, which found it a useful way to describe itself.
[Guest]: But I don't know what it means, really, in terms of India today. And I think what you say is quite
[Guest]: right, the spectrum should be rather different. You know, we should be thinking about things in
[Guest]: rather in a very different way, actually. And it's kind of suffocating, and it's a bit sad.
[Guest]: And I imagine you sort of share this feeling that, that, you know, one can be socially very,
[Guest]: very liberal, but economically, you know, right wing, you know, extreme right wing,
[Guest]: and there shouldn't necessarily be any contradiction. You know, you can believe
[Guest]: in free, absolutely free, free markets, but also believe in a huge amount of social responsibility,
[Guest]: which is fine, you know, why not?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the way I sum up my beliefs is that two consenting adults should be free to do whatever,
[Amit Varma]: whatever they want with each other, as long as they harm no one else, whether it is in a bedroom
[Amit Varma]: or the marketplace. And you'll find one set of people saying, no, no, we want to control what
[Amit Varma]: you do in the bedroom. And another set of people saying, no, no, we want to control what you do
[Amit Varma]: in the marketplace. And the point is, it's just a question of rights. If I want to trade with you
[Amit Varma]: in some way, why should anyone stop me? It's a positive some game between us, you're reducing
[Amit Varma]: the value in both our lives, by kind of getting in the way. So, but
[Guest]: I think in a place like India, in some ways, the thing to look at is not left, right, not politics,
[Guest]: it's who's in charge of the real estate of Delhi real estate, and who's in power in the in the
[Guest]: clubs, you know, I mean, who's running, who's a member of the Gymkhana and golf club, etc, etc.
[Guest]: And who's got which, which particular bungalow in Delhi. And what you find is that, you know,
[Guest]: at one stage, there were a bunch of, you know, Gora creeps, and then there were a bunch of
[Guest]: Congresswallas. And now it's a different bunch who are taking exactly the same privileges.
[Guest]: And, you know, once you get into your nice position, why should you change anything?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, the state is a state, once you're a subject, you're a subject. So, tell me about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, India, like you had this incredible period of time as head of the Middle East Bureau,
[Amit Varma]: where you covered such eventful times, right? And then you, so why India? What made you come here?
[Guest]: Well, I desperately needed to change for one thing. I mean, I wanted to do something,
[Guest]: it was a radical change, I was feeling quite burned out. It was partly, you know,
[Guest]: personal disappointment with just the collapse of, not that I'm a great revolutionary, just I
[Guest]: knew an awful lot of, you know, personal engagement with people who are in prison,
[Guest]: exiled, tortured, dead, you know, you name it. I mean, it was just really very tough
[Guest]: those last few years, sort of terrible disappointment. So, I wanted to have a
[Guest]: challenge that was completely new, something absolutely different. And I really knew very
[Guest]: little about India. I mean, you know, just new general knowledge stuff. But I had been to India
[Guest]: a couple of times, I was invited to the Jaipur Literary Festival a couple of times, once to
[Guest]: present, you know, my Cairo book, in fact, and we had such a good time. It was such a welcoming
[Guest]: atmosphere. It was magical, fun, engaging, brilliant people, a great setting. It was just
[Guest]: seductive, actually. So, India did its full, like, seductive trick. And so, when the opportunity came
[Guest]: to do India Bureau, I was really, really interested. And luckily, my wife felt the
[Guest]: same way. And, you know, also, for a lot of Western-type people, the notion of India may
[Guest]: seem like a, you know, difficult one. Hardship post, you know, hot, steamy country with tropical
[Guest]: diseases and poverty and, you know, that sort of thing. But frankly, coming from where we were
[Guest]: coming from, it seemed rather tidy and orderly and shaped up and compared to, you know, turmoil
[Guest]: and revolution in Cairo. So, that was never a particular obstacle. And I have absolutely no
[Guest]: regrets. India's been fascinating. And I mean, you know, one of the big rewards of being a journalist
[Guest]: and one of the reasons why I've remained a correspondent and haven't turned into an editor
[Guest]: sitting in a cozy desk in London, which is what nearly all of my contemporaries are now, is that
[Guest]: I enjoy the kind of phase of being a really stupid person in a completely new place and having to
[Guest]: get on a really sharp learning curve to find out stuff. So, my first year in India, I hope my,
[Guest]: you know, my coverage wasn't too painful, but I was really pretty stupid. I didn't understand
[Guest]: what was going on. I got up to speed fairly quickly to, you know, adequate speed. But
[Guest]: it's been such a long kind of curve to understand more and more about India, but I've just enjoyed
[Guest]: the learning process. It's been, you know, really quite wonderful just to understand a place that's
[Guest]: really, in many ways, so unique and deep, actually, you know, and varied as India. It's been
[Guest]: fantastic, you know, just sort of mind exercise, great stuff.
[Amit Varma]: You know, like you said, that whole approach, which I love, which is a great approach that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, of a stupid person trying to figure things out, because India is so incredibly
[Amit Varma]: complex. So the challenge is when you come, you know, who do you look to as your first
[Amit Varma]: guides to what this country is about? Who do you talk to? Because, you know, the danger there is
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, a sort of self selected group of people you have access to, you know, in Latins
[Amit Varma]: Delhi, per se can take you in one direction. And then what do you do? You know, where do you go?
[Amit Varma]: What kind of stories do you look at? What do you decide to even focus on? Like, you've done a bunch
[Amit Varma]: of wonderful stories, you've done a story on the North-South divide, for example, on, you know,
[Amit Varma]: MK Stalin raising that spoonful of rice, and you know, talking about her carbon dating shows that
[Amit Varma]: Tamil Nadu is older than the rest of the Tamil civilization is older than the rest of India,
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth. You've done stories on political corruption, for example, the Rajya
[Amit Varma]: Sabha election of Subhash Chandra, where he beat the Congress candidate RK Anand because 13 of the
[Amit Varma]: Congress party members marked their ballot paper with the wrong kind of ink. And then the question
[Amit Varma]: is, is it deliberate? Is it corruption? And you also did a great story on, you know, witches
[Amit Varma]: being sort of persecuted in modern day India or dions as they are called and you had a very moving
[Amit Varma]: story about a lady that happened to a Dalit woman that happened to. So, you know, how did you then
[Amit Varma]: figure out from this really amorphous mass of a million possible stories, that what are the things
[Amit Varma]: I want to kind of focus on and work on and so on and so forth? And what was, you know, from an
[Amit Varma]: economist point of view, what was your brief from them? Like, did you, how much time would you get
[Amit Varma]: to work on a story? Were you, did you have freedom to just pick anything you want? What was that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, give me the inside dope?
[Guest]: Basically, it's a complete, you're absolutely right. It's a total embarrassment of riches.
[Guest]: There's too much. I mean, it's just, and it's, you know, I just wallow in the amount of
[Guest]: possible stories, you know, it is as I was at Salman Rushdie, a sea of stories, you know, I mean,
[Guest]: India is just a fountain, gushing fountain of amazing stories and material for journalists.
[Guest]: And it's just, it's actually embarrassingly too much. And, you know, it's embarrassing how little
[Guest]: one you can actually grasp hold of. And of course I have a, you know, huge handicaps, which is that
[Guest]: I don't speak Indian languages, you know, and I don't have, you know, social network background,
[Guest]: et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. So one is dealing with a rather limited, you know, it's like
[Guest]: looking through a porthole at the ocean. So, you know, it's handicapped. And so there's a certain
[Guest]: amount of randomness in what's pulled out of this great sea of stuff to choose to write about.
[Guest]: In terms of direction from London, basically I've had almost none, zero. I mean, it's almost
[Guest]: complete freedom to what I want to, really no direction, you know, occasionally a bit of push,
[Guest]: you know, on the editorial side or something like that. If editors in London want to write
[Guest]: an opinion piece or something like that, it goes in one direction. Sometimes there's a,
[Guest]: it might be a tiny bit of friction about, you know, I don't think we should put it that way,
[Guest]: or that's a bad thing to emphasize or, you know, but there's basically been no real
[Guest]: attention on that. And the difficulty, I mean, we are, you know, we don't actually have that
[Guest]: much space. That's the big problem. As a paper, we don't have that much space. Our resources are
[Guest]: really quite limited. We're kind of quite small on the ground as The Economist in India. So you
[Guest]: have to pick and choose what to write about. And, you know, a kind of regret of mine is that that
[Guest]: means that you often can't do the really good human interest stories. Because there's also,
[Guest]: there's always the big political picture that has to be covered. You know, our readers want to know
[Guest]: what's kind of the big picture of what's going on. And although they may love to read other stuff,
[Guest]: you know, about some personal thing or some, you know, digressive story, which has a lot of,
[Guest]: you know, sort of tactile, you know, quality to it. But we also have to cover, you know,
[Guest]: big stuff like elections or interest rate rises or, you know, the big, big economic trends and
[Guest]: so on and so forth. And there just isn't enough space to do both really adequately, I find.
[Guest]: So I, you know, unfortunately, I find that we often write more about elections than I would
[Guest]: really like to. But you kind of have to because, you know, people want to know which way things
[Guest]: are going. And, you know, our global audience isn't that close to India. And the other thing
[Guest]: is that a lot of the really wonderful stories in India require a bit of knowledge about India
[Guest]: that's really hard to deliver in an 800 word, as you yourself were saying, you know, you can't give
[Guest]: enough background to explain everything. So for example, this story about witches and witch
[Guest]: burning, you know, I had to just fit in around the edges, some of the sort of statistical problems of
[Guest]: witch burning and why is it a problem, but focus really on just one person's story, very many.
[Guest]: And in order to get an adequate explanation, even in a sketchy way of the sort of structure
[Guest]: of a village society, let alone, you know, a district, a state, a country, India is just so,
[Guest]: you know, so complicated. It is hard to explain India to the outside world. And that's been,
[Guest]: it's been a challenge to do that in a pretty limited format. So I'm sort of, I'm proud of
[Guest]: having done that. But I feel like I've missed a lot of really good stories. And some of my
[Guest]: Western colleagues who have more resources here, more reporters, different formats with bigger
[Guest]: space, you know, have been able to do more, some more exciting stories than I have, but it's,
[Guest]: which is great.
[Amit Varma]: And you'd also have to, you know, being part of the economists here would also carry this sort
[Amit Varma]: of double edged sword, that on the one hand, because of, you know, how big your brand is,
[Amit Varma]: and how seriously it's taken, your access, like you mentioned earlier, would probably go up,
[Amit Varma]: I'm imagining that more people will talk to you than otherwise would. But the flip side of that
[Amit Varma]: is that if your coverage is perceived to be negative, then that access might even go down,
[Amit Varma]: they might get too sensitive, for example, your coverage of the COVID numbers, you know, that's
[Amit Varma]: as we are recording that is being debated, but you guys wrote about it more than a year ago,
[Amit Varma]: about, you know, how sort of off the mark they were and how they were so much more than the
[Amit Varma]: official estimates, which, you know, so tell me sort of a little bit about that, what are the
[Amit Varma]: particular challenges of being part of the economist under a regime or, you know, with a
[Amit Varma]: regime in power that is so sensitive, and that's one bizarre thing about it's almost this post
[Amit Varma]: colonial mentality that I think Indians tend to care too much about what white people think,
[Amit Varma]: you know, which is in a sense, it's a good thing, because, you know, one reason Indira Gandhi
[Amit Varma]: supposedly called off the emergency was that, you know, the New York Times was writing bad things
[Amit Varma]: about her, and she really wanted to be regarded well by them. And of course, she was delusional
[Amit Varma]: enough to think that she would win the election. So she called for that. And it's clearly something
[Amit Varma]: that Modi also cares about. I think some of the other people in the government like the Amit Shah
[Amit Varma]: and Adityanath of the world may not give a shit. But Modi clearly does because, you know, he sort
[Amit Varma]: of wants to be perceived well by the world and not just by India. So what are your thoughts on that?
[Guest]: Yeah, well, in some ways, I've been lucky, because, you know, I've been quite critical
[Guest]: of this government. I mean, we haven't shied from, you know, pretty head on criticism
[Guest]: of the government. Compared to a lot of other journalists, I have not suffered too badly in
[Guest]: return. Again, the anonymity helps for that, you know. For example, I don't get trolled so much
[Guest]: on Twitter, because people don't recognize who, what this name, you know, my personal name doesn't,
[Guest]: isn't particularly associated with my job, you know, which is fine. And also, they don't even
[Guest]: know whether an article in The Economist was written by me, it might have been written by
[Guest]: someone else anyway. So I managed to escape the vast trolling that a lot of my colleagues get
[Guest]: subjected to.
[Amit Varma]: A good policy would be blame it on Alex.
[Guest]: Exactly, blame it on my dear colleagues. Yeah, so that's one advantage. But it is true. I mean,
[Guest]: this current government is very prickly about the press. They don't seem to have quite understand
[Guest]: how the press works to tell the truth. And what's odd is that instead of trying to figure out how
[Guest]: the press works, or getting advice about how the press works, they seem to have taken the
[Guest]: approach of, well, we have to teach the press how we work. And it's kind of a bit the attitude of,
[Guest]: you know, the guys from out of town who've come into Delhi, and they've been used to doing things
[Guest]: a certain way out of town, and think you can do the same things the same way in the big capital,
[Guest]: where, you know, I think there's a kind of comfort zone with this government, which is that they
[Guest]: expect the press to say what they want the press to say. You know, that's your job is to relate
[Guest]: things and just, you know, tell the news basically, tell people what we're telling you. And
[Guest]: it's all very one way, it's unidirectional. But the idea that the role of the press is to
[Guest]: constantly challenge doesn't seem to be very well accepted. So there's bound to be, you know,
[Guest]: friction. And, you know, that friction seems to be certainly growing, which is dismaying. I mean,
[Guest]: you know, when I first came here, there was, back in 2016, you could still, there was a kind of,
[Guest]: there was much more of a strong pulse to the Indian press, whether television or whatever,
[Guest]: there was a, now you find that pulse feels rather weak. It's not to say that there's not,
[Guest]: there's plenty of, you know, variety and so on and so forth. But often it's, you have to
[Guest]: seek it out in your own bubble, and you know, it's not reverberating beyond, you know, a small
[Guest]: circle, which is a, which is a shame, because there's so much journalist, journalistic talent,
[Guest]: and the stories are amazing. And you've also got governments at every level in this country that
[Guest]: need to be exposed to, you know, criticism. And, you know, it's that, there's nothing
[Guest]: healthier for society than getting this stuff out there. And I just, as I said before,
[Guest]: I find that the conversation is getting increasingly stilted. And, you know, the
[Guest]: polarization is also not healthy. As you say, it's kind of, you're either with us or against us. And
[Guest]: if you say anything that is any form of criticism, then you must be against us in every way. And it's
[Guest]: just not true. No, I mean, I'm perfectly happy to accept that some things are a good idea and
[Guest]: some things are a bad idea and take them at face value and so on. So, you know, I wish, I wish those,
[Guest]: the atmosphere was slightly less tendentious right now. I think everyone should chill out, actually.
[Amit Varma]: Everyone should chill out is such great advice. You know, in Indira Gandhi's time,
[Amit Varma]: there was this famous quote, I forget by whom, but he said that, referring to the media,
[Amit Varma]: said the media was asked to bend and it chose to crawl. And you see a similar thing sort of
[Amit Varma]: happening now. You know, and there are a few outliers, but you're right that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, do those outliers really reach beyond our bubble? We don't know. And certainly they
[Amit Varma]: don't reverberate. And I like that word you use, maybe don't reverberate as widely as
[Amit Varma]: other outlets do. And my question here is this, that we can think of journalism in two ways.
[Amit Varma]: We can think of journalism as providing something that people want in a marketplace of supply and
[Amit Varma]: demand, where people want information and perspective and all of that, and journalism
[Amit Varma]: is doing that. But it is fundamentally a marketplace and therefore dependent on demand.
[Amit Varma]: And when you live in an age of narrative battles, and the demand is for a particular kind of
[Amit Varma]: narrative, then you kind of get caught up in that. Or even if there was demand for both kinds of
[Amit Varma]: narratives, it'd still be narratives. And, you know, you can't be slave to a narrative or a
[Amit Varma]: tribal way of looking at the world. So that's one way of looking at it that look, there is a
[Amit Varma]: marketplace of supply and demand, you have to follow the bottom line, how are we going to pay
[Amit Varma]: our journalists, if we don't make money, we only make money by catering to that. The other view
[Amit Varma]: would be that in any democracy, journalism plays that crucial role, it is an institution by itself,
[Amit Varma]: you know, where you are sort of afflicting the comforted and comforting the afflicted,
[Amit Varma]: as the saying goes, speaking truth to power. And as you mentioned, the economist also sort of has
[Amit Varma]: a tendency of doing exactly that. But then the question comes up that, how is this sustainable?
[Amit Varma]: And now my idealistic belief is that there are enough people who value this aspect of journalism
[Amit Varma]: for journalism to be viable on its own. And it's just a question of sort of crossing that gap,
[Amit Varma]: figuring out how to, you know, get past the friction of actually supporting this kind of
[Amit Varma]: journalism ourselves. Like what I see happening more and more in the creator economy is that
[Amit Varma]: your middlemen are fading away, the mainstream is fading away, you no longer have to be dependent
[Amit Varma]: on platforms, creators are able to, you know, monetize the regard that their consumers have
[Amit Varma]: for them directly from the consumers without having to go through platforms without having
[Amit Varma]: to go through, you know, the extremely inefficient means of advertising, accumulate eyeballs, sell
[Amit Varma]: ads, and that's happening directly. In the long term, do you see something like that as possible
[Amit Varma]: for journalism? Or are we being too idealistic? Because the point here is that I believe in my
[Amit Varma]: way that it is enough people will surely want this kind of journalism to sort of support it,
[Amit Varma]: which is why I keep urging people that, you know, support News Minute, support Alt News,
[Amit Varma]: support News Laundry, support Scrollwires, just support all of these people, whether you agree
[Amit Varma]: with them on specifics or not, it doesn't matter. Support them because they need to exist. What's
[Amit Varma]: your outlook on journalism in a country like India, the way things are going?
[Guest]: Yeah, to go back to the first part of what you were saying about the journalism's role as a
[Guest]: creator of narratives. I mean, that's partly true. But I think, actually, in a sort of really healthy
[Guest]: sort of working democracy, the narratives are created by the politicians, actually. I mean,
[Guest]: the journalists, you know, hold up the mirror, you know, question, but the actual story narrative is
[Guest]: created by politicians. And that is a big failing in India right now. There isn't a proper
[Guest]: counter narrative to the dominant narrative. And that's a failing of politicians more than a failing
[Amit Varma]: of the press, you know, if there were a formidable counter narrative.
[Amit Varma]: I'd actually argue that the root cause of that is not the politicians or the press, it's the people,
[Amit Varma]: because the politicians are responding to demand. If there is no demand for a counter narrative,
[Amit Varma]: then there won't be one. Or if there is no market for it.
[Guest]: You may be right, you may be right. But you kind of create your market. So you sell a new product,
[Guest]: you introduce a new product and put it on the market. You know, there is no new product being
[Guest]: introduced. I don't see it out there. You know, I mean, you know, it's a failing of, you know,
[Guest]: Congress Party big time, and other politicians too, who are too localized. No one is thinking
[Guest]: in terms of a big narrative, you know. So you've got one big narrative that dominates because it's
[Guest]: compelling and large, and it brings a lot of people in. And, you know, there's nothing that
[Guest]: pushes back against that in a systematic sort of, you know, way that captures the imagination of a
[Guest]: lot of people. And that is a failing of politicians. You know, it's a failure to,
[Guest]: you know, sell a product. You know, they don't have a product out there that anyone wants to
[Guest]: buy. And it's not just India, by the way. I mean, it's happening in other places. I mean,
[Guest]: it's happening right now in front of our eyes in the United States with the Democratic Party,
[Guest]: which really doesn't have a product that's, you know, it can say what it isn't, but it's hard to
[Guest]: say what it is, you know. So that's one side of that. The other part of what you're suggesting,
[Guest]: I think you're quite right. I mean, you know, there's a shifting of the model for journalism,
[Guest]: partly, you know, because of technology, etc, etc, etc, digital world that we live in. And,
[Guest]: you know, it has, again, dangers, opportunities, the opportunity of selling stuff directly and
[Guest]: getting really talented people out there. And it's true. I mean, you know, you see the success
[Guest]: of people who are simply successful because they're just bloody talented, you know, getting
[Guest]: rewarded for that. You know, one of them is this guy called Amit Verma. I don't know if you've ever
[Guest]: heard of him. But, you know, the transitional moment is very difficult. And, you know,
[Guest]: something like The Economist, big mainstream Western corporate, you know, outfit, we had a
[Guest]: very hard time. You know, there was like a period about, I can't remember when it was, six years ago
[Guest]: when our entire model collapsed, you know, of getting most of our income from advertising.
[Guest]: Literally, it collapsed in one week. Three major advertisers just dropped magazine advertising.
[Unknown]: Why?
[Guest]: Because they moved it all to digital. Just like that. And not even without even consulting each
[Guest]: other. This is like the Zeitgeist acting, you know, are like three major, major advertisers.
[Guest]: So our advertising revenues just like vanished overnight. It was quite bizarre. And this
[Guest]: happened to print media all over the world, you know. And to bounce back from something like that
[Guest]: is really difficult, you know. But years later, the entire model has changed. The whole revenue
[Guest]: model is completely different. It's all based on subscriptions. And what you have to do is
[Guest]: opt for a different kind of subscriber experience, different modules, different ways of approaching,
[Guest]: different ways of receiving information. So there's now an app, it's now this, you know,
[Guest]: you get podcasts, you get, you know, it's a whole different range of stuff that's,
[Guest]: you know, different platforms. And so that is definitely the, not just the future, it's already
[Guest]: happened. And, but, you know, there'll be winners and losers in all of this. But ultimately, as you
[Guest]: say, there needs to be a market out there that's willing to pay for it. And that will always be
[Guest]: there. But it takes, there's this transitional moment, you have to change people's habits,
[Guest]: you know. How much do you want to pay for it, you know? You know, I remember in a place like
[Guest]: Egypt, most of the, a lot of the big newspapers are actually government-owned newspapers,
[Guest]: they're just completely government-owned. And they were being sold at the equivalent of like,
[Guest]: you know, one rupee, two rupees a copy. So everyone buys this stuff. As soon as that kind
[Guest]: of subsidy went, their, you know, their actual circulation dropped from, you know, millions down
[Guest]: to tens of thousands. So, and that was before the sort of digital competition or age, it's just a
[Guest]: matter of, you know, what is the sort of model. And, but, you know, I think one would like to see
[Guest]: a media, you know, sector in general, a press, which is financially independent and secure,
[Guest]: you know, whatever that takes. I think it's just really, really, really, really important. You
[Guest]: know, the model that's working now in the US actually is kind of, it's working, but not so
[Guest]: sure how great it is. But basically, a lot of the biggest, you know, press outfits are now just
[Guest]: owned by billionaires who run them as vanity projects. You know, it keeps all of my journalist
[Guest]: colleagues in business, which is great. And a lot of them do absolutely wonderful work. And,
[Guest]: you know, I congratulate billionaires for buying newspapers or magazines or whatever they do. I
[Guest]: think it's a great thing. But, and a lot of these, some of these billionaires are determined to keep
[Guest]: things independent, and that's all great and good. But, you know, one would like to see
[Guest]: the press be as secure as it was. You know, you think back to, like, the 1970s in America,
[Guest]: when the Washington Post took on the Pentagon. You know, that's pretty impressive, actually.
[Guest]: You know, and I don't think we're, it's, in some ways, it's less easy to imagine that happening
[Guest]: now. You know, America still has a very strong, you know, and fairly independent press, but a lot
[Guest]: of countries, India is not alone in finding a fading strength. I mean, a lot of European
[Guest]: countries, France is an example, for example, there's just been a lot of concentration lately,
[Guest]: which has got people very worried about how independent the press actually is.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, before we kind of wind this up, and it's been so generous of you to give me
[Amit Varma]: so much of your time, and there is more important work to be done, especially in journalism. So,
[Amit Varma]: tell me, you've been in India for, you know, since 2016. And you're now leaving and best of
[Amit Varma]: luck with, you know, moving forward. But what are the lessons that you've learned about India?
[Amit Varma]: Because it is quite likely, once again, to go back to the question I asked at the start of
[Amit Varma]: this episode, that there are things that people like me or that my listeners, we might
[Amit Varma]: take for granted, because we are here, that, you know, in the daily drip, drip,
[Amit Varma]: drip of whatever is happening, we don't notice that shit is normalized. But what are the big
[Amit Varma]: lessons? What do you know now about India that you did not know, you know, when you came here?
[Guest]: Well, that's a huge question. That takes thought, you know, I mean, I think, you know,
[Guest]: one of the things that I that I know is just the complexity and scale of India, you know, it's just,
[Guest]: it's very hard to get your head around that unless you've actually been here, you know,
[Guest]: and what an achievement, you know, just, you know, keeping going is an incredible achievement,
[Guest]: you know, to just keep this country together at all is pretty fantastic, actually. And so I think
[Guest]: that's, that's a big thing. And, you know, also just the, something I mentioned before, just the
[Guest]: kind of quality of people, talent, just the just the sheer talent that is, you know, bursting out
[Guest]: of this place is quite spectacular. And I don't know, it's hard to categorize or anything like
[Guest]: that. But it's just, it's there. And this is what's going to take India, you know, through
[Guest]: all kinds of difficulties. But then also just, again, scale of challenges, you know, just,
[Guest]: you know, I can see why, you know, sometimes you say, why doesn't, why don't people fix this? Why
[Guest]: don't people fix that? You know, it's very easy to throw these, throw out these questions. And
[Guest]: at the same time, you just see the challenges are immense. And I can perfectly understand why
[Guest]: people would simply throw up your hands in despair and say, you know, ah, you know, it's,
[Guest]: this is too complicated. You know, something else that is not really visible to the outside
[Guest]: is the this, the amount of, you know, dedicated self-sacrifice. And, you know, that is made by
[Guest]: some individuals, which is just absolutely extraordinary. I mean, certain people have
[Guest]: just done amazing things to make other people's lives better. I mean, I rarely seen a country
[Guest]: where really small number of people, I'm not going to name names, because it's not a point in
[Guest]: some exercise in, you know, casting praise in particular. But I just, I've met here several
[Guest]: individuals who just made a difference to millions of people's lives, you know, tens of millions of
[Guest]: people's lives in a way that's just like, you know, quite mind blowing.
[Amit Varma]: Can you actually take names?
[Guest]: No.
[Unknown]: Well, okay.
[Guest]: Yeah, I'd rather not. Yeah. So that's, that's, that's, that's one of the things that is not so,
[Guest]: so visible. And I, you know, I think, yeah, maybe I'll just stop with that.
[Amit Varma]: Well, yeah, that's cool. So okay, the final question, you know, and you've heard the show,
[Amit Varma]: so you'll kind of already know what it is. Actually, I'll ask you two final questions,
[Amit Varma]: because both of these are traditional final questions, though I don't ask them both together.
[Amit Varma]: And the first, first one is, when you think of India, what gives you hope? And what gives
[Amit Varma]: you despair? Looking ahead, maybe 10 years, 15 years?
[Guest]: I think I'll just start with despair, because I'd rather end with, you know,
[Guest]: conclude with hope rather than with despair. I really, I mean, and again, this is going to sound
[Guest]: really trite, actually, I really worry about the environment. I mean, you know, I mean, it is,
[Guest]: India's on its way towards something really very disastrous. And I think, despite a lot of,
[Guest]: you know, government noise and propaganda, I don't think the scale of the trouble has been
[Guest]: grasped at all strongly enough. And I think India really has to do better at cleaning up its act,
[Guest]: you know, water, air, it's got to be absolutely top priority. And, you know, I find it sort of
[Guest]: annoying that there's a lot of finger pointing, oh, you know, India didn't cause world pollution
[Guest]: or global warming, therefore, we can pollute India as much as we like. No, it's a current
[Guest]: burning problem for Indians today, you know, in the health of your own citizens right now,
[Guest]: desperately so, you know, to do something really radical about the environment. So that's something
[Guest]: that frightens me, actually, because, you know, I fear if things go along the current trajectory in
[Guest]: 10 years, India is going to look like the world's, you know, major outlier in terms of how, you know,
[Guest]: dangerous India is for itself and to the world environmentally. So that's something that I
[Guest]: worry about. And, you know, the other thing is the politics, you know, the politics of divisiveness,
[Guest]: which may earn immediate electoral gains, but is terribly dangerous. And also just, I mean,
[Guest]: from an objective point of view, just stupid, you know, India has the world's largest minority,
[Guest]: you know, it has 200 million Muslims and all kinds of other minorities, well, many, many different
[Guest]: shapes and kinds, some religious, some, you know, whatever. I mean, India has it all, but just tops,
[Guest]: you know, take it from the top 200 million Muslims, the world's largest minority. It just seems a
[Guest]: terribly bad idea to make so many people unhappy, which is what's happening right now. You know,
[Guest]: it's a bad policy, you know, it's just, it doesn't lead anywhere good. And, you know, I think it
[Guest]: should just stop for one reason or another. And I can't see what the logic is behind people who
[Guest]: think it's a good idea. You know, I mean, it's just going to be destructive for India. If you
[Guest]: simply be, you know, if I were some kind of slave trading person, and I saw 200 million people and
[Guest]: think of the talent that's out there, you know, that should be harnessed for India, you know,
[Guest]: it shouldn't be turned into a bunch of angry people who either want to leave the country,
[Guest]: as quite a few Muslim friends of mine want to do at this stage, or don't feel like equal citizens
[Guest]: and are perpetually stirred up, and some of whom might turn to, you know, violence, potentially.
[Guest]: Anyway, so that certainly worries me. And I mean, those are two big things. Is that enough
[Amit Varma]: bad stuff?
[Amit Varma]: For despair? Yeah, I think it kind of covers everything. What would hope?
[Guest]: Yeah. Well, hope, you know, to go back to talent part, I think, you know, you look at something
[Guest]: like the, you know, the startup ecosystem in India, it's bloody impressive, you know, and
[Guest]: these people are just burning with talent and actually being given the scope to do stuff as
[Guest]: well, which is a very good thing. It helps that the government is largely out of the way, frankly,
[Guest]: I mean, that's one of the reasons why that whole end of India is working so well is precisely
[Guest]: because the government hasn't found ways to stick its fingers in. And I hope it doesn't, actually.
[Guest]: So I think that's very good. And, you know, some of this stuff that, you know, the whole
[Guest]: digital ecosystem in general is quite a good thing for India. And it will allow India to
[Guest]: leapfrog other countries. It is doing much better in this in many, many other countries,
[Guest]: at the same level of development. And I think, you know, there's also in many realms,
[Guest]: India starts from a point where there's an immense upside for change. For example, agriculture,
[Guest]: you know, the potential change in productivity in what you could be doing agriculturally in India
[Guest]: is immense, given the right mix of things. I also think one of the things that makes me hopeful,
[Guest]: I don't know if it's hopeful or despairing, there are structures in India that the change to which,
[Guest]: you know, changing them would not be difficult, would actually require minimal effort and could
[Guest]: have immensely beneficial effects. One of them is the judicial system, courts and the whole judiciary.
[Guest]: This is really terrible drag on so many things in India, the whole criminal justice system,
[Guest]: the fact that you have now 76% of people in prison are under trial. This is a scandal.
[Guest]: It's an immense scandal. And what a waste of time and talent, you know, if you just think of the
[Guest]: waste put into that, simply get rid of that. It isn't difficult. It really isn't difficult. You
[Guest]: just need more judges. It's really very simple. I mean, in terms of sort of like, how much percent
[Guest]: of GDP needs to be spent to get this thing done? It's minuscule, you know, so just do it. And I
[Guest]: think also, the same thing goes in a way for the educational sector, just open it up, just do it,
[Guest]: you know. You know, the fact that it takes a war in Ukraine to expose the fact that there are
[Guest]: 40,000 Indian medical students in this, you know, snowy bit of Eastern Europe, you know, I mean,
[Guest]: why? It's just, it makes no sense at all. I think the number of Indian students abroad is now 2
[Guest]: million. And it's our failure. It's entirely our failure. Which is great for the world's
[Guest]: institutions. But, you know, these people could be learning in India. So, you know, for example,
[Guest]: so I think that to make me hopeful, is there simple solutions that would really make,
[Guest]: you know, to use the word reverberate widely, you know, I can see them very easily done. And
[Guest]: I just, you know, I wish they'd simply be done. But I'm hopeful that they will be done.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, and I've had episodes on a bunch of these agriculture education and all of those
[Amit Varma]: which are linked from the show notes. My final question is, you know, if you had to recommend
[Amit Varma]: books, music, films that you absolutely love, that you feel that, you know, you love it so much,
[Amit Varma]: you want to share it with the world, what would those be?
[Guest]: Gosh, you know, I'd forgotten that you asked this question. And you know, I should have prepared
[Guest]: myself better. I find myself stumped. I have such a weird collection of things that I think are
[Guest]: wonderful. You know, for example, one book that often comes up in my thoughts when people ask me
[Guest]: this is an Icelandic saga called Njáls saga. I don't know if you've ever read this. It's an
[Guest]: amazing book. It's written in the, I think, 12th century or something like that. And it takes place
[Guest]: in the like the 10th century. And in fact, a lot of current day Icelanders are descended from the
[Guest]: same characters, and they know they're great, great, great, you know, actually related to these
[Guest]: people. But it's a story of a kind of brutal crime, and then a trial. And it reads like a sort
[Guest]: of, you know, you know, docudrama or something like that. It's quite fantastic about this legal
[Guest]: system. And, you know, so it's a kind of courtroom drama set in 10th century Iceland, which is
[Guest]: wonderful. So that's just something that quite randomly comes to my mind. Another thing that
[Guest]: I've really enjoyed reading, these are things I read a long time ago. One of them is Balzac,
[Guest]: the French novelist, short story writer, because he's just has a wonderfully human touch. It's all
[Guest]: set in like, you know, early 19th century Paris. What's interesting is that he talks about things
[Guest]: like, you know, how much money people get paid, you know, and how they live, you know, the actual
[Guest]: sort of like, you get you get a real, really tactile sense of how people actually lived. It's
[Guest]: not some historical setting all about romance. No, it's about real, real issues. And the stories
[Guest]: are things that could happen today. So that's, that's quite…
[Amit Varma]: Balzac died of drinking too much coffee, by the way. He wrote an essay about his addiction for coffee,
[Amit Varma]: and he got so addicted to it that no amount of coffee could satisfy him. So eventually,
[Amit Varma]: he'd just crush the coffee beans and have them raw.
[Amit Varma]: So he got a hole in his stomach from too much acidity or something like that.
[Amit Varma]: But it's kind of too much coffee. And both you and I have been, you know, we drank coffee in
[Guest]: the break and all of that. So be careful. Okay, I'll stay away from crushing beans.
[Guest]: Yeah. I'm trying to think of other bits of sort of culture, Gyan. You were asking about books,
[Amit Varma]: music, films, whatever. I mean, these are not mandatory.
[Guest]: Yes. No, no, I'm just trying to think. I think in films, I've seen so many great films. And,
[Guest]: you know, there's one movie in the last few years, several years ago that I actually watched it once
[Guest]: and then immediately watched it all over again. Like the whole thing from the beginning, which
[Guest]: was The Lives of Others. Amazing movie. That was just, it's just so, the quality is just fantastic
[Guest]: and so real. I think that was very good. And I have a certain fondness for some Turkish movies,
[Guest]: these really, with very long takes, pretty fantastic. There was one called Yol, I think,
[Guest]: which is really very kind of dark and deep movie. And I don't know, music, I have a particular
[Guest]: liking for this Brazilian guitarist who I think, I'm not even sure if he's still alive,
[Guest]: but his name is Baden-Powell, i.e. Baden-Powell, like the founder of the Boy Scouts. But he's
[Guest]: really fantastic. He's been playing since the 1960s, this kind of Brazilian jazz. He's
[Guest]: absolutely spectacular. I recommend absolutely anything that he's done. And amusingly, the
[Guest]: sort of racy thriller that I wrote during the lockdown, I wrote the thriller in between seasons
[Guest]: of a French television serial. But I watched the first part the year before, and then there was
[Guest]: like a break, and I kind of forgot about it entirely. And then I wrote my own thriller,
[Guest]: and then I watched the final season, right after finishing my thriller. And I just suddenly
[Guest]: realized how ridiculously influenced I was by this French TV serial, which is, I had no awareness of
[Guest]: this when I was actually writing the thriller. And only afterwards, I realized that it was
[Guest]: strongly influenced. But it's called Le Bureau. I don't know if you've seen that. It's quite
[Guest]: gripping. It's a sort of spy thriller set in the Middle East, between Paris and the Middle East.
[Guest]: It's extremely realistic and really super acting and just very gripping, wonderful story.
[Amit Varma]: Well, so Max, thank you so much. It's been such a pleasure. And thank you so much for coming and
[Amit Varma]: spending so many hours sharing time.
[Guest]: I mean, it's been, you know, an ambition of mine to come and spend time with you. And
[Guest]: I'm so glad to have been able to achieve it. It's the high point of 60 years in India.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks a lot.
[Amit Varma]: Wait, don't go anywhere. This episode isn't over. Max is one of the great storytellers of our times,
[Amit Varma]: and he's going to tell us a few stories now.
[Guest]: Elevator Story number one. In the building that we lived in, in downtown Cairo, it was a sort of
[Guest]: narrow, tall building, but quite old. It was like from 1932. Beautiful art deco building, actually,
[Guest]: rather wonderful. But we lived on the very top floor, and the elevator was often on the blink.
[Guest]: And so we got very, you know, involved in our elevator. And it turned out there were lots of
[Guest]: stories about this elevator. It wasn't just the fact that it was on the blink when we were there.
[Guest]: But there was a guy who had lived in the same apartment that I lived in a few years earlier,
[Guest]: who was a professor at the American University in Cairo, and his name was Dr. Gene Pippin.
[Guest]: He was a professor of English literature. He was a bit of a boozer, drank a lot of alcohol,
[Guest]: beer particularly. He was very fat. And one day he got into the lift at the top floor
[Guest]: and was taking it down, and something snapped, and the whole cabin of the elevator descended
[Guest]: very fast to the bottom of the floor, terrifyingly fast. It wasn't quite a crash,
[Guest]: but it was just a very quick descent. And so Gene Pippin, in the elevator,
[Guest]: probably slightly drunk, fell to the bottom. And as he reached the bottom floor,
[Guest]: the boab or chokidar, the watchman of the building, was standing there, who was this wonderful old
[Guest]: Nubian man. And he was standing there, and he heard the sound of the collapsing elevator.
[Guest]: And he saw this falling cabin of the elevator, and he saw it fall right past the ground floor
[Guest]: where he was standing. Gene Pippin, inside the elevator, saw the chokidar standing outside,
[Guest]: and as he fell past the ground floor landing, the elevator actually came to a rest at the bottom.
[Guest]: Boom! And the guy inside was okay. Gene Pippin was all right, but he could just see through the
[Guest]: top of the door of the elevator. And what he saw was the boab or chokidar, this old Nubian man,
[Guest]: have a heart attack and fall dead on the ground, having watched the elevator fall past it.
[Amit Varma]: It's such a cinematic kind of scene. So, as an elevator falls past a boab,
[Amit Varma]: the boab falls with it and hits the ground.
[Guest]: Exactly. The guy in the elevator is fine, but the person watching it had a heart attack at
[Guest]: watching this thing fall past him. Yes. Elevator story number two. There was a
[Guest]: French executive working for a company in Cairo who was very particular about his health,
[Guest]: which was not good. He had a heart condition, and he had very expensive insurance. And lo and
[Guest]: behold, when he was working in Cairo, he fell ill, seriously ill, and insisted on being taken to the
[Guest]: best possible hospital in Cairo, which at the time was the military hospital, which has a nice view
[Guest]: of the Nile, insisted on being taken to the military hospital. He was taken to the military
[Guest]: hospital. He insisted that his cardiologist be flown in from Paris, and his cardiologist was
[Guest]: flown in from Paris to look after him. The cardiologist came, examined the patient and
[Guest]: determined that he was not in any condition to himself be flown out of Egypt to Paris. No,
[Guest]: he needed an operation right then in Cairo. And so this French executive was sedated, put on a
[Guest]: gurney, wheeled down the corridor in this best hospital in Cairo, and sent down the corridor
[Guest]: to be taken to the operating floor, which was on the floor above, and wheeled down to the end of
[Guest]: the corridor and into the elevator, and pushed into the elevator. Unfortunately, the elevator
[Guest]: wasn't there. It was an empty shaft, and he plummeted to his death at the bottom of the
[Guest]: elevator shaft because the elevator was broken. This is a shocking story, but why am I smiling?
[Amit Varma]: And what you also mentioned was that people react so differently to this particular story.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about it.
[Guest]: Yeah, well, I've had friends who just cackle with laughter over this story. I have one friend in
[Guest]: Cairo who just said, tell me that story again. I love that story. Just say it again. And other
[Guest]: people hear the story and think, oh, that's bleak and sad. But I'm afraid they've heard an awful lot
[Guest]: of sort of slightly black stories about medicine in Cairo. So that's the sort of thing that kept
[Guest]: gossip moving. Bus story number one. Yeah, I was once on a bus in Cairo, a sort of public bus,
[Guest]: just a normal transport bus. And they have front doors and back doors. It was quite crowded, but
[Guest]: unusually, it wasn't so crowded that the aisle was actually open. And we stopped at one stop,
[Guest]: and a guy got on the front, and it turned out he was selling combs. That's why he got on the bus.
[Guest]: So he was selling combs, and he was selling combs at a particular price. I can't remember
[Guest]: exactly what it was. It was sort of one comb for 80 piastres, you know. And he was calling out as
[Guest]: he was standing in front of the bus, comb for 80 piastres, you know, bargain of your lifetime,
[Guest]: comb for 80 piastres. And the next stop along, someone got in at the back door of the bus,
[Guest]: and lo and behold, it was another comb seller. And the guy who got on the back of the bus
[Guest]: was shouting out, you know, a comb for 75 piastres, you know. And so there was this kind of
[Guest]: bidding that happened between these two comb sellers, one from the front of the bus, one from
[Guest]: the back of the bus. And they were calling out different numbers, and they began to overhear each
[Guest]: other. And as they got closer to each other, they realized that one guy was undercutting the other
[Guest]: guy, you know. So instead of being one for 75 piastres, it was like, I'll sell them two for
[Guest]: one pound. And the other guy said, no, I'll sell them two for 80 piastres. And they got closer and
[Guest]: closer to each other, and the price got more and more competitive. And passengers on the bus who
[Guest]: would never have imagined that they might possibly want one comb or two or three were suddenly buying
[Guest]: five combs because they were getting these fantastic bargains. And the bargains kept getting
[Guest]: better, and these two guys kept getting more aggressive and shouting at each other. And
[Guest]: suddenly, what they were shouting at each other, instead of shouting different numbers, they were
[Guest]: shouting insults at each other. They met in the center of the bus, just where I was sitting,
[Guest]: and it turned into a fight, and they started hitting each other. And meanwhile, lots of combs
[Guest]: had been sold, of course. They started hitting each other. The bus conductor, to break up this
[Guest]: fight, sort of pushed them apart, pushed them to the back of the bus, told them, you've got to
[Guest]: leave the bus. Everyone intervened, said, no, don't hit each other. No, no, no, no, no, no, no.
[Guest]: And they were pushed off the bus, forced to leave the bus. And as they left the bus,
[Guest]: and the bus moved on, I looked out the window of the bus and looked back, and I saw these two guys,
[Guest]: and they high-fived each other and cackled with laughter. They just made a killing selling these
[Guest]: combs at like five times their value because they had made such a show of this bargain.
[Amit Varma]: It's such a fantastic behavioral economics lesson in this, like the anchoring effect,
[Amit Varma]: for one thing. And just the way you're kind of shifting incentives and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: making it seem irresistible, you have to buy.
[Guest]: Exactly. But that was just, you know, one of a million little street scenes that,
[Guest]: and it's amazing how elaborate and clever their little show was and worked so well. In fact,
[Guest]: I think even some of the people who had spent too much for these combs were like impressed by the
[Guest]: show. Hashish story number one. There are lots of hashish stories, but hashish story number one,
[Guest]: there was a group of hashashin, as hashish smokers are known, and they used to meet every single
[Guest]: night, you know, night after night. Every night they'd do the same thing. They'd sit together,
[Guest]: they'd smoke hashish, they'd tell jokes. So this had gone on for years. Every day they'd, you know,
[Guest]: work and work, and then at night they'd meet and they'd sit together, hang out, tell jokes.
[Guest]: And it got to the point where they'd all heard all each other's jokes again and again and again.
[Guest]: So they had a solution. They decided they would just simply number the jokes. So, you know,
[Guest]: there was like joke number 74. Someone would say, 74. And the rest of them would chuckle a little
[Guest]: bit and say, yeah, that was, remember that one, that was a good one. You know, someone would say,
[Guest]: 85. And everyone would giggle a little bit and say, hey, that's cool. That's really cool.
[Guest]: But one night they were sitting together and someone said, 196. And one of, you know,
[Guest]: they all chuckled a little bit, but one of them just sat there and he just laughed and laughed,
[Unknown]: and he wouldn't stop laughing. He's slapping his thighs, guffawing, ha, ha, ha, 196, ha, ha, ha.
[Guest]: All the rest of them got to think this was rather peculiar. And, you know,
[Guest]: finally when the guy sort of fell silent, they said, you know, hey, you know, Mahmoud,
[Guest]: what is it about 196? What's so special about 196? And he said, never heard that one before.
[Guest]: Taxi story. I took one taxi in Cairo. It was a very old Skoda. At the time, you know,
[Guest]: this dates back to like the 1980s, the Skoda was not a good car. It did not belong to Volkswagen.
[Guest]: It was still a sort of Czech, you know, behind the iron curtain kind of car. It was not great.
[Guest]: And the engine was actually in the back of the car. And we were driving along beside the Nile,
[Guest]: but, but, but, but, but, but, but, but, and suddenly there was an almighty crash, you know,
[Guest]: absolutely colossal crash. And the car is kind of screeched and skidded to the side of the road.
[Guest]: And the driver, I was like, you know, shocked and frightened and didn't know what had happened. And
[Guest]: I kind of watched the driver and the driver's head fell forward onto his hand. And he's sort
[Unknown]: of clutched his head in his hand. And he said, Tani, Tani, which means again, again. And I said,
[Unknown]: what is it? Again, what? What happened again? He said, the engine dropped out again.
[Amit Varma]: It was literally the whole engine had fallen out of the car. Thank you, Max. You're welcome.
[Amit Varma]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai